Better Zero-Shot Reasoning with Self-Adaptive Prompting
Xingchen Wan∗1,3, Ruoxi Sun1, Hanjun Dai2, Sercan Ö. Arık1, Tomas Pfister1
1Google Cloud AI Research
2Google DeepMind
3Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{xingchenw,ruoxis,hadai,soarik,tpfister}@google.com
Abstract
Modern large language models (LLMs) have
demonstrated impressive capabilities at sophis-
ticated tasks, often through step-by-step rea-
soning similar to humans. This is made pos-
sible by their strong few and zero-shot abili-
ties – they can effectively learn from a hand-
ful of handcrafted, completed responses (“in-
context examples”), or are prompted to reason
spontaneously through specially designed trig-
gers. Nonetheless, some limitations have been
observed. First, performance in the few-shot
setting is sensitive to the choice of examples,
whose design requires significant human effort.
Moreover, given the diverse downstream tasks
of LLMs, it may be difficult or laborious to
handcraft per-task labels. Second, while the
zero-shot setting does not require handcrafting,
its performance is limited due to the lack of
guidance to the LLMs. To address these lim-
itations, we propose Consistency-based Self-
adaptive Prompting (COSP), a novel prompt
design method for LLMs. Requiring neither
handcrafted responses nor ground-truth labels,
COSP selects and builds the set of examples
from the LLM zero-shot outputs via carefully
designed criteria that combine consistency, di-
versity and repetition. In the zero-shot setting
for three different LLMs, we show that using
only LLM predictions, COSP improves perfor-
mance up to 15% compared to zero-shot base-
lines and matches or exceeds few-shot base-
lines for a range of reasoning tasks.
1 Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs)
have led to state-of-the-art performance in existing
natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Wang
et al., 2018, 2019; Thoppilan et al., 2022) and to
exciting emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022a). A
prominent example of the latter is the strong per-
formance on tasks that require analytical reasoning
and/or methodical planning, which were previously
*Work done during internship at Google.
thought to be difficult even for massive LLMs (Rae
et al., 2021). This has been made possible by scal-
ing the model size and training corpus, the strong
few-shot and zero-shot abilities of modern LLMs,
and new techniques such as the chain-of-thought
(CoT) methods: Few-shot CoT (Wei et al., 2022b)
prepends the test queries with solved input-output
pairs as in-context examples to prompt the LLM to
generate rationales. Zero-shot CoT (Kojima et al.,
2022), on the other hand, appends trigger phrases
after test queries to elicit reasoning. These methods
constitute a competitive alternative to conventional
fine-tuning which can be very costly for modern
LLMs due to their sheer size, and is not possible
when the LLMs are available as inference-only
APIs – an increasingly popular paradigm for serv-
ing models like ChatGPT (Schulman et al., 2022).
Despite these promising advances, numerous
open challenges remain. Although Zero-shot CoT
is task-agnostic (and thus the most generally appli-
cable in any scenario) and does not require human
effort for labeling, it often underperforms its few-
shot counterparts, with LLMs that are not shown
with “template rationale” often producing spuri-
ous reasoning steps. On the other hand, for Few-
shot CoT, the performance has been shown to be
sensitive to the choice of the demonstrations (Wei
et al., 2022b), and thus improving the performance
might require significant trial-and-errors and/or spe-
cific relevant expertise. Given the fact that modern
LLMs are often used for very diverse downstream
tasks, selecting even a few useful per-task examples
can quickly become more laborious as the number
of tasks increase. This is particularly true for the
CoT tasks where both rationales and answers need
to provided in the demonstrations. In some other
cases, it could be difficult or simply impossible
even to handcraft a few examples beforehand: for
example, there might be tasks involving tedious and
complicated reasoning or planning and/or novel
test-time tasks unseen previously.
3493Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 3493–3514
July 9-14, 2023 ©2023 Association for Computational Linguistics
[Question] Henry had 11 dollars. For his birthday he got 18 more
dollars but spent 10 on a new game. How much money does he have
now?
[Demo1] Q: John bought 21 games from a friend and bought 8 more
at a garage sale. If 23 of the games didn't work, how many good
games did he end up with? A: Let's think step by step. He bought 21
+ 8 = 29 games in total. He has 29 - 23 = 6 good games. ✅
[Demo2] Q: John bought 21 games from a friend and bought 8 more
at a garage sale. If 23 of the games didn't work, how many good
games did he end up with? A: Let's think step by step. He bought 21 +
8 = 29 games in total. He bought 21 + 8 = 29 games in total. He
bought 21 + 8 = 29 games in total. He has 29 - 23 = 6 good games. He
has 29 - 23 = 6 good games. ✅
[Demo3] Q: Faye picked 23 and her mother picked 5 carrots from
the garden. If only 12 of the carrots were good, how many carrots
were bad? A: Let's think step by step. 23 + 5 = 28 28 - 12 = 16 16 / 2 = 8
8 / 2 = 4 4 / 2 = 2 2 / 2 = 1 1 / 2 = 0. ❌
Input Output
Q: [Question]
A: Let’s think step by step.
How much money does he have now?
Henry has 11 + 18 - 10 = 27. ❌
[Demo1]
Q: [Question]
A: Let’s think step by step.
He had 11 + 18 = 29 dollars. He spent 10
dollars on a game, so he has 29 - 10 =
19 dollars. ✅
[Demo2]
Q: [Question]
A: Let’s think step by step.
He had 11 dollars. He had 11 dollars. He
had 11 dollars. He had 11 dollars…. ❌
[Demo3]
Q: [Question]
A: Let’s think step by step.
11 + 18 = 29 29 - 10 = 19 19 / 2 = 9 9 / 2 =
4 4 / 2 = 2 2 / 2 = 1 1 / 2 = 0 ❌
[Demo3] [Demo1]
Q: [Question]
A: Let’s think step by step.
11 + 18 = 29. 29 - 10 = 19. ✅
In this work, our focus is to improve LLM rea-
soning in the general zero-shot setup with access
to input queries but not labels (i.e., transductive
zero-shot (Xian et al., 2017)). We are particularly
interested in this setup due to its aforementioned
generality, but it is also a very challenging one
given the lack of external guidance. To address this,
instead of relying on simple triggers or handcrafted
examples, we propose prompting the LLMs with
the outputs generated by their own. To achieve this,
we first collect a pool of rationales and answers to
the test questions that are generated by the LLM
using Zero-shot CoT, and then select the most suit-
able questions and answers for in-context learning,
similar to Few-shot CoT. The choice of which self-
generated rationales to include, however, is highly
non-trivial, as illustrated in Fig. 1: not only does
this problem inherit all of the challenges identified
above for the few-shot scenario, it also carries the
additional difficulty that the self-generated demon-
strations themselves are imperfect. Retrieval meth-
ods assuming perfect labels (Rubin et al., 2022; Liu
et al., 2022) are shown to perform worse than ran-
dom in this setup (Zhang et al., 2022), and previous
works bypass this issue by focusing only on surface
text similarity and diversity of the question embed-
dings (Zhang et al., 2022), which as we show, in
cases when most of the initial generated outputs
are wrong, can be misleading.
To address these challenges, we propose COSP
(Consistency-based Self-adaptive Prompting), an
algorithm requiring only unlabelled samples
(which are typically cheap to obtain, for exam-
ple, via continuous, on-the-fly collections of user
queries) and no labelled examples for strong per-
formance, while also providing the capability of
further improving the performance when a few la-
belled examples become available. The algorithm
consists of two stages. In the first stage, COSP
collects the pool of LLM responses to test ques-
tions via Zero-shot CoT. We use these responses
to compute the outcome entropy of each question,
a metric inspired by self-consistency (Wang et al.,
2022a). This metric is then used to identify suitable
question-reasoning pairs in an unsupervised way.
In the second stage, we perform another pass
over all test samples, but with the selected question-
reasoning pairs as in-context demonstrations.
We experiment with COSP with three different
LLMs on a range of tasks. We demonstrate a 10–
15% improvement in average accuracy for 6 arith-
metic and logical reasoning tasks over Zero-shot
CoT with self-consistency baseline in PaLM-62B
and GPT-3, and >3% improvement in PaLM-540B.
All of these are achieved with a negligible addi-
tional computational cost. In many cases, COSP
performs on par or better than the few-shot base-
lines with handcrafted in-context examples.
2 Preliminaries
Chain-of-thought (CoT) Prompting. Few-shot
CoT prompting (Wei et al., 2022b) prepends test
questions with a series of in-context demonstra-
tions of related solved questions as prompts. Gen-
eralizing beyond the few-shot setup, Kojima et al.
3494
Figure 1: Selecting in-context demonstrations for rea-
soning tasks can be a delicate art. LLM output is sensi-
tive to in-context demos and their reasoning, especially
when they are generated and imperfect. Example in-
puts & outputs shown from top to bottom (MultiArith
dataset & PaLM-62B model): (1) zero-shot CoT with no
demo: correct logic but wrong answer; (2) correct demo
(Demo1) and correct answer; (3) correct but repetitive
demo (Demo2) leads to repetitive outputs; (4) erroneous
demo (Demo3) leads to a wrong answer, but (5) combin-
ing Demo3 and Demo1 again leads to a correct answer.
This motivates the need for a carefully-designed selec-
tion procedure for in-context demos, which is the key
objective of this paper.
1 2 Generated outputs as in-context demos
Inputs Stage 1 Outputs
Score
2.0
Q:
A: Let's think
step by step.
Q:
A: Let's think
step by step.
Q:
A: Let's think
step by step.
LLM
Compute
score:
(Eq. 8 & 9)
3.0
n/a
3.6
3.7
3.5
1.9
Q:
A: Since Therefore the
answer is
Q:
A: Since Therefore the
answer is
Q:
A: Let's think step by step.
LLM
2.1
Stage 2
Outputs
2.0
Majority vote over outputs from
both stages for nal prediction
Figure 2: The overall procedure of COSP. In Stage 1 (Left, §3.2), we run Zero-shot CoT multiple times on each
question to generate a pool of demonstrations (each consisting of the question x(i), generated rationale r(i)
j and
predicted answerˆ
y(i)
j ) and assign a score to each. Note that different rationales leading to the same final answer are
marked the same color in “Outputs“ blocks (described in §3.2). In Stage 2 (Right, §3.3), we augment the current
test question for which we are interested in finding in-context examples (boxes shaded in blue) with a number of
in-context demonstrations. These consist of test questions and selected Stage 1 outputs whose predicted answers
ˆ
y(i)
j are the majority predictions for that question that minimize the score defined in Eq. (8) with the procedure
described in §3.2. The augmented test question is used to query the LLM a second time. Finally, a majority vote
over outputs from both stages forms the final prediction.
(2022) propose Zero-shot CoT and shows that even
by simply concatenating a trigger phrase (e.g.,
“Let’s think step by step”) to the test question,
LLMs can be prompted to output intermediate steps
in absence of handcrafted examples (we show an
illustration of Few-shot and Zero-shot CoT in Fig.
5 in App. A). Our work builds upon on these
works and improves upon them: we use the same
zero-shot setup as Kojima et al. (2022), while en-
abling in-context learning in the format of Wei et al.
(2022b) through an innovative use of the LLM’s
own outputs.
Self-consistency. Self-consistency (Wang et al.,
2022a; Li et al., 2022b), which approximates the
marginal distributions of the LLM via majority vot-
ing of multiple decoded reasoning paths, has been
shown to lead to significant performance boosts
across various tasks. It is compatible with either
Zero- or Few-shot CoT by first introducing prob-
abilistic decoding in the LLM decoding using a
non-zero temperature, and then sampling m rea-
soning paths, each consisting a rationale-answer
pair (r(i)
ˆ
,
y(i)) from the LLM posterior:
{(r(i)
j ,
ˆ
y(i)
j )}m
j=1 ∼P(r(i)
,
where x(i) are the test questions, cdenote the gen-
eral format of the prompt template (e.g. the choice
of in-context demonstrations in Few-shot CoT or
the trigger phrase in Zero-shot CoT) and θdenote
the weights that parameterize the LLM. The pre-
diction with the majority (or more precisely, the
plurality) vote is then chosen as the final prediction:
ˆ
y(i) = arg max
ˆ
y(i)
j
m
k=1
I(ˆ y(i)
j = ˆ y(i)
k ), (2)
where I(·
,·) is the indicator function. We use and
extend self-consistency as an integral part of our
algorithm. Instead of simply taking the majority
vote, we also use it as a key criterion for selecting
the in-context demonstrations, which we discuss in
detail in §3.
3 Consistency-based Self-adaptive
Prompting (COSP)
ˆ
y(i)|x(i),c,θ), (1)
As discussed in the Introduction, our goal is to de-
velop a method that improves zero-shot reasoning
abilities of LLMs and reduces the need for human
effort by automatically selecting in-context demon-
strations from the LLM’s own generated outputs.
To effectively achieve this, we propose COSP (over-
all procedure shown in Fig. 2 and Algorithm 1).
3495
ˆ
y(i)
, (5)
In this section, we present the problem setup, fol-
lowed by detailed descriptions of the two stages
and the key components of the algorithm.
3.1 Notations & Problem Setup
We assume a test set Dwith |D|= N test exam-
ples. Given an LLM and a test query x(i) ∈D
(the test label, y(i) is not available to the LLM),
we seek to generate a set of K demonstrations S,
where each demonstration sk is a concatenation of
another test question x(ik ) ∈D\i, the generated
rationale (r(ik )) and final prediction (ˆ
y(ik )) from
the LLM (typically via Zero-shot CoT. The details
are provided in §3.2):
sk = Concatenate(x(ik ),r(ik )
,
ˆ
y(ik )). (3)
The set Sis then prepended as the “context” to the
test question xi, serving as a guide to the LLM:
˜
x(i) = Concatenate(s1,...,sK,x(i)), (4)
and˜
x(i) is queried again (i.e., in-context learn-
ing). The objective is to build the set of in-context
demonstrations Sthat maximize the LLM perfor-
mance without accessing the ground-truth labels.
3.2 Stage 1: Building the Pool of Generated
Responses & the Demonstration Selector
Building the Candidate Pool. We first build a
pool of responses Pto the test questions Dfrom
which demonstrations Sare selected. Each ele-
ment of Pis a candidate demonstration in the for-
mat defined in Eq. (3). To achieve this, we lever-
age the zero-shot capabilities of LLMs by running
Zero-shot CoT (Kojima et al., 2022) over all test
questions For each test question x(i), we query the
LLM mtimes with non-zero temperature to extract
multiple reasoning paths {r(i)
j }m
j=1 and potentially
different answers {ˆ
y(i)
j }m
j=1 according to Eq. (1).
Sampling mpaths per question yields mN can-
didates at this stage.
Consistency for Demonstration Selection. With
the candidate pool built, we now select Sfrom it.
This selection process is highly non-trivial – not
only is in-context learning known to be sensitive
to the choices of the demonstrations (Wei et al.,
2022b; Liu et al., 2022), we also have the additional
challenges that (1) we have to select K(typically
small and ≤10) from a large set of candidates P,
and that (2) the candidate pool is imperfect: in
the absence of access to ground-truth labels, the
responses in Pare potentially erroneous, and could
be misleading to the LLM.
To address these problems, we propose to use
self-consistency both (1) to prune the candidate
pool P, and (2) to select the demonstrations in ab-
sence of ground-truth labels. Drawing upon the
insight from Wang et al. (2022a) that “majority pre-
dictions are more likely to be correct”, for each test
question x(i) we first compute their majority vote
prediction(s)ˆ
y(i) from all predictions {ˆ
y(i)
j }m
j=1
with Eq. (2) and retain only the rationales that
lead to the majority vote prediction (which are
more likely to be correct) and prune the rest of the
rationale-prediction pairs (which are more likely to
be wrong) from P. Following previous work (Wei
et al., 2022b), we also use further heuristics, which
we detail in App. B, to remove obviously bad
candidates from P(e.g. responses containing no
numbers for arithmetic tasks, or overly short and/or
fragmented responses). Formally, after pruning, for
test question x(i), the set Pis given by:
P=
N
i=1
¯
m(i)
j=1
x(i),r(i)
j ,
where jindexes over all¯
m(i) reasoning paths in the
i-th question that led to the majority vote prediction
ˆ
y(i) and are not otherwise excluded.
The second usage of self-consistency draws
upon the insight that it approximates the amount
of uncertainty of the model for its prediction. It is
conceptually related to pseudo-labelling (Lee et al.,
2013; Shi et al., 2018; Rizve et al., 2021) and en-
tropy minimization (Grandvalet and Bengio, 2004).
Intuitively, if the LLM outputs the same prediction
repeatedly even under different reasoning paths,
it is expected to be more confident in its predic-
tion, and we should assign a stronger belief that the
prediction is correct or at least plausible (“consis-
tent predictions are more likely to be correct”). To
capture the model uncertainty, for a question x(i)
with mfinal answers from which we assume that
there are n≤munique answersˆ
y(i)
ˆ
1 ,...,
y(i)
n , we
compute the normalized entropy as:
H(x(i)|{ˆ
y(i)
j }m
j=1) =
n
α=1 ˜p(ˆ y(i)
α ) log ˜p(ˆ y(i)
α )
log m
,
(6)
where αis used to index over the unique answers,
˜p(ˆ y(i)
α ) is the empirical frequency of unique answer
3496
Algorithm 1 COSP. Stage 1 (§3.2) and Stage 2
(§3.3) steps marked in orchid and peach respec-
tively. COSP+-specific steps (refer to §3.3) are
marked in dark orange.
1: Input: Test questions D= {x(i)}N
i=1, LLM, # paths per
sample m, Pool of generated responses P←∅.
2: Output: Predictions {ˆ
y(i)}N
i=1.
3: for i ∈[1, N ] do
4: Query the LLM with Zero-shot CoT to obtain m ratio-
nales and predictions {r(i)
ˆ
j ,
y(i)
j }m
i=1 to x(i)
.
5: Add candidate demos (Eq. (3)) that led to the majority
vote prediction to P.
6: end for
7: Build the set of demonstrations Susing the procedure
described in §3.2 and Eq. (8) & (9).
8: for i ∈[1, N ] do
9: Concatenate the Sto x(i) (Eq. (4)) and query the LLM
again to obtain m new rationales and answers (COSP)
/ an adaptive number of new rationales and answers
proportional to the entropy of x(i) (COSP+).
10: Compute the majority vote over 2m answers from both
stages as the final answerˆ
y(i)
.
11: end for
repetitive demonstrations often lead to worse per-
formance, as exemplified in Fig. 1 (see Demo2).
We hypothesize that repetitive responses acting as
demonstrations create a strong but spurious pattern
on which LLMs are prone to overfit, often leading
to catastrophic deterioration of performance.
To address this, we first filter out the responses
that involve self-questioning which we observe of-
ten leads to repetition or prompts the LLM to an-
swer the generated questions instead of the original
questions. We also introduce a quantitative mea-
sure by splitting demonstrations into phrases delim-
ited by punctuation marks (“[.,?!]”). Assuming
that we have Qphrases*, we compute repetitive-
ness as:
Rr(r(i)
j ) =
ˆ
y(i)
α in all manswers, and the entropy is normalized
by log m, the (negative) maximum entropy if all
predictions are different from each other, to [0,1].
As shown in Fig. 3, we indeed find that the
normalized entropy is a good proxy over a number
of different tasks where low entropy is positively
correlated with correctness.
1.00
Outcome Entropy
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Correct
Wrong
GSM8K MultiArith SingleEq
Figure 3: Entropy over outcomes approximates correct-
ness. Distributions of entropy (Eq. (6)) vs. the ground-
truth accuracy using Zero-shot CoT of the majority vote
predictions out of 7 sampled paths on GSM8K, Multi-
Arith and SingleEq using PaLM-62B (Chowdhery et al.,
2022). Questions answered correctly have significantly
lower entropy. Further analyses are provided in App.
C.1.
Penalizing Repetitions. Eq. (6) scores the test
questions x(i), but for each x(i), especially for
those with a low outcome entropy, there are mul-
tiple reasoning paths r(i)
j for the majority predic-
tion. While they lead to the same final answer, we
find that their suitability as in-context demonstra-
tions nonetheless differs. A key observation is that
3497
2
Q(Q−1)
Q
a=1
Q
b=a+1
Wab , (7)
where W ∈RQ×Q
+ is the similarity matrix over
all pairs of phrases with Wab = Sc(ϕ(qa),ϕ(qb)),
where Sc(·
,·) computes the cosine similarity and
ϕ(qa) and ϕ(qb) denote the vector embedding of
a-th and b-th phrases, typically obtained through
an auxiliary, small language model. From Eq. (7),
the matrix is summarized by averaging across off-
diagonal elements, which gives an average similar-
ity between two arbitrary phrases in the response.
We note that it is possible for other techniques that
penalize repetition at decoding-time to be applied
in lieu (like hard or soft n-gram blocking (Klein
et al., 2017; Paulus et al., 2017)). We use the pro-
posed method as it also captures semantic-level rep-
etitions, which we find to be more common than
verbatim repetitions, especially when a non-zero
temperature is used.
Overall Design & Building S. With measures of
consistency (Eq. (6)) and repetitiveness (Eq. (7))
defined, for a candidate demonstration p∈Pgiven
by the concatenation of question x(i), rationale r(i)
j
and the (majority) predictionˆ
y(i), the score is pro-
posed as:
F(p|x(i),r(i)
,{ˆ
y(i)
j }m
j=1) = H(x(i)) + λRr(r(i)
j ),
(8)
where λis a trade-off hyperparameter that is set to
0.2 in all experiments. To ensure that the different
terms of Eq. (8) are of a comparable scale, we
*Repetitiveness is undefined when Q = 1. In this case, we
assign the minimum self-repetition score over all demonstra-
tions where it is defined.
Algorithm 2 Building Sfor K ≥2.
1: Initialize Swith the minimizer of Eq. (8): S ←{p
∗
0 =
arg minp∈PF(p)}
2: for k ∈[2, K] do
3: Find the minimizer of the modified objective (Eq. (9)):
∗
p
k = arg minp∈PGk (p).
4: Add p
∗
k to Sand remove p
∗
k from candidate pool P.
5: end for
employ z-score normalization commonly used in
reinforcement learning (van Hasselt et al., 2016)
and NLP (Deng et al., 2022) by replacing each
term with their respective z-score, with the mean
and standard deviation computed over P. To se-
lect a single in-context demonstration (K = 1),
we utilize the minimizer of the scoring function
p∗= arg minp∈PF(p). More commonly, though,
we would like to select multiple demonstrations,
leading to a combinatorial selection problem. For
computational feasibility, we use a greedy forward
selection procedure (Caruana et al., 2004) as de-
scribed in Algorithm 2. We initialize Swith p∗and
in a greedy way and select the minimizer of the
following modified objective function:
Gk(p) = F(p) + λRq(p,Sk−1) ∀k∈[2,K], (9)
where Sk−1 is the partially built demonstration set
Swith k−1 elements already selected, and
Rq(p,Sk−1) = max {Sc(ϕ(p),ϕ(sk′))}k−1
k′=1
(10)
is a term to encourage diversity in question types
and reasoning patterns in Sby penalizing demon-
strations that are similar to previous ones. We ad-
ditionally constrain that Sshould not contain mul-
tiple reasoning paths to the same question. The
algorithm is repeated until all Kdemonstrations of
Sare selected.
3.3 Stage 2: Query with Generated In-context
Demonstrations
With Sselected, in Stage 2, we concatenate and
prepend the demonstrations to the test question
(Eq. (3) & (4)) and query the LLM again with
mmore repetitions. The final prediction for each
question is then output as the majority vote across
the predictions from both stages.
Outcome Entropy as a Proxy to Difficulty. We
use the entropy (Eq. (6)) to select demonstrations
in §3.2. However, it is also a natural gauge of dif-
ficulty of a test question to the LLM, as a higher
entropy (thus a higher uncertainty) implies that the
LLM may require additional demonstrations for
this question. To this end, we also experiment with
a variant of COSP termed COSP+ (Algorithm 1)
in §5 which features an adaptively allocated num-
ber of in-context demonstrations per question that
is proportional to its zero-shot entropy in Stage 1,
with higher-entropy questions given more demon-
strations. It is worth noting that while it is easy to
select more demonstrations in COSP as we only
have to greedily optimize (8) until a higher K is
reached, for methods like Few-shot CoT, where the
number of demonstrations is also the number of
“shots”, increasing it requires handcrafting more
completed examples.
Extension to Few-shot. While we have built
COSP in the zero-shot setup, it can also be adapted
to the few-shot setup (which we term COSP-FS)
where, for example, a small number of labelled
demonstrations Qare available, and we seek to
augment them with more demonstrations without
further manual labelling. The key modifications
are: (1) instead of querying LLMs with zero-shot
CoT in Stage 1 (Line 4 in Algorithm 1), we use
Few-shot CoT with Q; and (2) during construction
of S(§3.2) we initialize with Qinstead of an empty
set. We experiment with COSP-FS in §5.
Remarks on the Test Set Size. It is worth noting
that while we have assumed the entire test set is
available to COSP and perform experiments un-
der that assumption (as we will show in §5) for
straightforward comparison with the baselines, it
is possible for COSP to work with only a fraction
of test data or in an online mode where the unla-
beled data are only collected continuously. One
may easily achieve so by using the available data to
perform Stage 1 of the COSP procedure. In Stage 2,
we may perform majority voting over both stages
only if the test query was available at the start of
Stage 1, and majority voting over Stage 2 only is
instead performed otherwise.
4 Related Works
There have been several recent works that also aim
to improve LLM reasoning using the models’ own
outputs. STaR (Zelikman et al., 2022) is one of
the first works to bootstrap reasoning from LLMs:
starting from a small number of labelled data, STaR
prompts the LLMs to generate rationales over the
large corpus of untrained data. However, STaR
requires human verification on the generated ratio-
3498
Model PaLM-62B PaLM-540B
Setting 0-shot 5-shot Prev 0-shot 5-shot Prev
Method 0-shot Auto- COSP 5-shot 8-shot 0-shot Auto- COSP 5-shot 8-shot
CoT CoT (Ours) CoT CoT CoT CoT (Ours) CoT CoT
# Paths 14 14 7+7 14 14 14 7+7 14
MultiArith 67.2 9.4 85.0 81.0- 95.2 99.0 98.8 96.0 99.3b
AddSub SingleEq CSQA StrategyQA 69.1 73.2 78.9 72.4 - 88.9 89.1 89.9 86.6 93.7b
74.4 77.8 78.7 79.8- 88.6 85.6 90.4 89.2-
GSM-8K 20.9 9.2 30.2 30.3 27.4a 68.5 71.4 71.9 64.3 74.4b
46.5 68.2 60.2 66.8- 74.2 79.4 76.4 80.7 80.7b
57.2 59.4 64.7 67.9- 66.0 75.7 75.2 81.4 81.6b
(Average) 55.88 49.55 66.28 66.37- 80.25 83.37 83.77 83.03 -
aMadaan and Yazdanbakhsh (2022). bWang et al. (2022a): Significantly more (40) paths sampled.
Table 1: Accuracy on PaLM-62B (Left) and PaLM-540B (Right) (Chowdhery et al., 2022). Methods in the
0-shot columns use no ground-truth label guidance, whereas the 5-shot results use 5 manually labelled in-context
demonstrations, randomly selected from the provided examples in Wei et al. (2022b). Prev columns show results
previously published under similar setups but often with significantly more sampling paths and/or labelled examples.
“# Paths” denotes the number of reasoning paths sampled per test question. COSP uses m= 7 paths per stage and
2m= 14 paths in total. We also report baseline results without self-consistency (which are worse) in App. C.2.
COSP and Auto-CoT use 5 generated in-context examples per test question. The top two results for each model are
bolded and ranked by color: best and second-best.
nale. More recently, Huang et al. (2022) relies on
self-consistency to improve LLMs by fine-tuning
on a large number of generated questions and ra-
tionales. However, both works rely on fine-tuning
of massive models, which requires access to model
weights and is much more expensive. In contrast,
our method can treat the model as a black box
and only requires forward passes. Other concur-
rent related works include Honovich et al. (2022)
and Wang et al. (2022b). However, while related
methodologically to our method, these papers fo-
cus on fundamentally different problems of data
generation and instruction following.
For the in-context learning setup (Brown et al.,
2020; Wei et al., 2022a; Radford et al.), various
methods have been proposed, typically to retrieve
relevant demonstrations from a relatively large
number of labelled examples (Rubin et al., 2022;
Su et al., 2022). However, Zhang et al. (2022)
shows that with imperfect labels, nearest neighbor-
style retrieval underperforms random selection and
propose Auto-CoT, one of the few existing works
that are fully comparable to COSP. Auto-CoT
also uses models’ zero-shot outputs as in-context
demonstration by selecting the responses to the
questions that are the k-means centroids in the em-
bedding space from an auxiliary language model
(a concurrent work, Li et al. (2022a) uses a sim-
ilar clustering approach). However, by selecting
based on question embedding only, Auto-CoT has
no control over the quality of the generated ratio-
nales, and is thus prone to generating erroneous and
misleading demonstrations; we empirically com-
pare to it in §5. Another concurrent work (Weng
et al., 2022) proposes self-verification, which is a
zero-shot reasoning verifier to recover conditions
from the predictions. However, it only works when
there is a unique correct condition that results in the
correct answer (such as arithmetic questions), but
is not applicable when there are multiple plausible
conditions.
5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental Setup
Datasets & Tasks. We consider the following
arithmetic and logical reasoning tasks: AddSub
(Hosseini et al., 2014), MultiArith (Roy and Roth,
2016), GSM-8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), SingleEq
(Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2015), CSQA (Talmor
et al., 2019) and StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021).
The licenses of these datasets are listed in App. B.
LLMs. We run experiments with 3 LLMs: PaLM
with 62 billion parameters (PaLM-62B) and
540 billion parameters (PaLM-540B) (Chowdh-
ery et al., 2022) (both quantized to int8 pre-
cision) and GPT-3 with 175 billion parameters
(code-davinci-001) (Brown et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2021). The readers are referred to App. B
for further details.
3499
Model GPT-3 (code-davinci-001)
Setting 0-shot 5-shot Prev
Method 0-shot Auto- COSP 5-shot CoT CoT (Ours) CoT # Paths 14 14 7+7 14
8-shot
CoT
MultiArith 50.3 78.5 80.7 60.7 82.7b
AddSub 43.5 31.9 61.5 63.3 67.8b
SingleEq 48.8 58.1 64.8 65.9-
GSM-8K 10.2 6.6 8.7 16.7 23.4b
CSQA 29.2 50.9 55.4 53.0 54.9b
StrategyQA 47.8 55.8 52.8 55.4 61.7b
(Average) 38.32 46.96 53.98 52.60-
bWang et al. (2022a): Significantly more (40) paths sampled.
Table 2: Accuracy on GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2021). Refer to Table 1 for further explanations.
Baselines. We compare against Zero-shot CoT
(Kojima et al., 2022) with and without self-
consistency (Wang et al., 2022a), and Auto-CoT
(Zhang et al., 2022). Auto-CoT does not use self-
consistency originally but for a fair comparison and
given that self-consistency significantly improves
LLM performance, we also include an Auto-CoT
baseline augmented with self-consistency (the re-
sults of original Auto-CoT without self-consistency,
which have worse performance, are reported in
App. C.2). Besides the zero-shot baselines, we
also include Few-shot CoT (Wei et al., 2022b) with
self-consistency as a comparison, where we use
5 handcrafted demonstrations randomly chosen
from the provided lists of examples in Wei et al.
(2022b) for all datasets to match the 5 generated
demonstrations in COSP and Auto-CoT. For COSP,
we sample m = 7 reasoning paths in the Stage 1
and Stage 2, respectively, and for Zero-shot CoT,
Few-shot CoT and Auto-CoT experiments with
self-consistency, equivalently we use 14 reasoning
paths for each question. In addition to the repro-
duced baselines, we also reference previously pub-
lished baselines under Prev columns in Tables 1 &
2 that use more labelled examples and/or sampling
paths, both of which lead to further performance
gains but at an additional cost. We show in §5.2 that
COSP may also take advantage of more sampling
paths when resources are available. As mentioned
in §3.2, we use λ = 0.2 (Eq. (8)) for all experi-
ments without further hyperparameter tuning – this
value is chosen to reflect our a-priori belief of the
relative importance of the objective function terms.
While it is possible to achieve even further perfor-
mance improvements by tuning this term, it is not
investigated in the present work for a fair compari-
son against the baselines.
5.2 Results
Discussions on Main Results. We show the re-
sults on PaLM-62B, PaLM-540B and GPT-3 in
Tables 1, and 2, respectively, and give some ex-
amples of the found demonstrations in App. D.
Since we find that self-consistency improves per-
formance in all cases, we only report the results
with self-consistency in these tables; the readers
are referred to App. C.2 for results without self-
consistency. In all cases, COSP delivers improve-
ments over Zero-shot CoT baselines with partic-
ularly large gains seen on PaLM-62B and GPT-3,
achieving 10%∼15% average improvement over
the Zero-shot CoT with self-consistency baseline.
Remarkably, even though COSP operates under a
much more challenging setup without ground-truth
labels, COSP performs on par or better than Few-
shot CoT in almost all tasks that use labels. We
argue the large gains seen in the smaller models
that significantly reduced their performance gap
to the very large models (e.g. PaLM-540B), can
be particularly practically impactful, given the for-
mer’s strong advantages in computational costs and
general accessibility. Furthermore, we find COSP
to be robust by consistently improving over the
zero-shot CoT baseline in all but one case, whereas
Auto-CoT sometimes deteriorates the performance.
We perform a failure analysis in App. C.5, and
show that by using self-consistency as a proxy of
correctness, in most cases COSP is capable of iden-
tifying outputs with sound reasoning as in-context
examples even when the task is very challenging
to the LLM under the zero-shot setup. In contrast,
Auto-CoT is more prone to selecting erroneous
examples; while Zhang et al. (2022) claims these
errors minimally affect performance, we find their
effect to be very model and task-specific, holding
true for larger models (e.g. PaLM-540B) and easier
tasks. However, on more difficult tasks or smaller
models, we find erroneous demonstrations to often
lead to performance deterioration.
COSP+
. We test COSP+ on the PaLM-62B
model (see App. C.3). In 5 out of 6 cases, COSP+
leads to further performance gain. Across experi-
ments, we use a fixed Kwhich is shown to perform
well overall, while COSP+ results show promise in
adaptively setting K; we defer a thorough investi-
gation to future work.
COSP-FS. We test COSP-FS in the few-shot
setting as described in §3.3. We focus on GSM-
3500
S1
S2
C
S2
C+D
COSP
S1+2,C+D
COSP+
S1+2,C+D
Accuracy
90
80
70
60
50
COSP
0-shot
5-shot
0 50 100
7 14 21
Accuracy
# Paths
(a) Components of COSP.
(b) Effect of # paths
Figure 4: Ablation results on MultiArith dataset using
the PaLM-62B LLM.
8K, the most challenging task for PaLM-62B and
GPT-3 where we hypothesize that labelled samples
would help more. We start with 5 labelled exam-
ples provided in Wei et al. (2022b) in Stage 1. In
Stage 2, we use COSP-FS to select 3 further exam-
ples. We show the results in Table 5 in App. C.4. It
is worth noting that while in Table 2 COSP reduced
the performance compared to Zero-shot CoT due
to the difficulty of this task and selecting correct
demonstrations from the zero-shot outputs (Table 7,
App. D), the addition of labelled examples restored
the effectiveness of COSP, primarily through the
restoration of the predictive value of consistency
(Eq 6) to correctness. We analyze this in App. C.5.
Ablation Studies. We perform ablation studies
on COSP, using the PaLM-62B model on the Mul-
tiArith dataset. We first analyze the relative im-
portance of various components of COSP and dif-
ferent terms in the scoring function Eq. (8) & 9.
As shown in Fig. 4a, the results in the following
settings demonstrate that all components of COSP
positively contribute to the performance:
1. S1: Majority vote on Stage 1 outputs only.
This is essentially Zero-shot CoT over m
paths.
2. S2,C: Majority vote on Stage 2 outputs only
(i.e. the mpredictions from the LLM after
in-context learning with S). Only the entropy
term (Eq. (6)) is used as the scoring function.
3. S2,C+D: Majority vote on Stage 2 outputs only
with the full scoring function (Eq. (8) & 9).
4. COSP(S1+2,C+D): Full COSP with majority
votes over predictions from both stages.
5. COSP+(S1+2,C+D): COSP+ from §3.3. Same
as (iv) but with an adaptive number of demon-
strations per sample.
Another possible baseline is to select demonstra-
tions randomly from the Stage 1 outputs instead
of using any demonstration selection heuristic de-
scribed in §3.2; we do not include this as this is in-
cluded in and outperformed by AutoCoT in Zhang
et al. (2022) – we outperform even AutoCoT as
shown in Tables 1 and 2. Lastly, we also ana-
lyze the effect of the number of sampling paths
in Fig. 4b, where it is clear that the performance of
all methods increases with number of paths. This
demonstrate that there is potential for further per-
formance gain by scaling COSP when additional
computational resources are available.
6 Conclusion
We propose COSP, a prompting algorithm to im-
prove zero-shot reasoning abilities of LLMs. It
achieves this by selecting in-context demonstra-
tions from its own outputs using a novel scoring
function that incorporates consistency, diversity
and repetitiveness. Across multiple LLMs and
tasks requiring complex reassigning, we demon-
strate large improvements over the state of the art.
We believe there are multiple promising directions
for future work: first, the present work focuses on
improving zero-shot reasoning, but we argue that
the key principle used in this paper may also be
extended to more general NLP task types. Second,
beyond solving reasoning problems per se, LLMs’
reasoning capabilities are increasingly used in other
scenarios for planning & interactions with external
environments (Yao et al., 2023) – extending COSP
to these setups could also be promising. We defer
thorough investigations to a future work.
7 Limitations
One limitation is that the efficacy of our method is
shown with massive LLMs in this paper. However,
we note that our method is based on only model
inference with them and is already considerably
cheaper than other adaptation methods.
Furthermore, our method seeks to improve
LLMs: while the technology itself is ethically neu-
tral, we acknowledge that there are various social
and ethical risks of potential misuse, especially
given the powerful generative capabilities of the
LLMs that have become increasingly accessible to
a broader audience (Weidinger et al., 2021). We
argue that both the prospective end-users and re-
searchers should be aware of these concerns when
using our method in order to mitigate these risks.
3501
Methodologically, we note that an integral com-
ponent of our algorithm is self-consistency. We
rely on the expectation that it reliably predicts ac-
curacy, which essentially places an expectation that
the model uncertainty should be reasonably well-
calibrated. While we have indeed found this to
be the case for almost all considered tasks and
models, additional investigations might be required
to ascertain their general applicability. Given our
reliance on self-consistency, for tasks where self-
consistency does not lead to significant gains, the
performance improvements with our method may
be limited. An example of this could be tasks with
very small label spaces (e.g. binary classification)
where “consistency” in outcomes may be achieved
much more easily even if the model simply out-
puts random predictions. A potential remedy, for
which we defer a thorough investigation to future
work, is to not only consider the consistency over
outcomes but also over the intermediate rationales
which are generated but not currently used for self-
consistency computation.
Second, while COSP improves performance in
an overwhelming majority of cases and is signifi-
cantly less sensitive to the original zero-shot model
performance compared to baseline methods like
AutoCoT, there still exist exceptional cases where
it fails to improve, especially when the tasks are
too challenging in zero-shot setup – we argue that
this is also due to the general, inherent limitations
of the LLMs. However, both continual improve-
ments on the foundational models and provision
of some human guidance (e.g., using COSP-FS)
should alleviate this issue.
References
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33:1877–1901.
Rich Caruana, Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil, Geoff Crew,
and Alex Ksikes. 2004. Ensemble selection from
libraries of models. In Proceedings of the twenty-
first international conference on Machine learning,
page 18.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming
Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka-
plan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.03374.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2022. Palm: Scaling
language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, et al. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math
word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168.
Mingkai Deng, Jianyu Wang, Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Yi-
han Wang, Han Guo, Tianmin Shu, Meng Song, Eric
Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2022. RLPrompt: Optimizing
discrete text prompts with reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
3369–3391, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot,
Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Did aristotle
use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with
implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–
361.
Yves Grandvalet and Yoshua Bengio. 2004. Semi-
supervised learning by entropy minimization. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 17.
Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo
Schick. 2022. Unnatural instructions: Tuning lan-
guage models with (almost) no human labor. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.09689.
Mohammad Javad Hosseini, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Oren
Etzioni, and Nate Kushman. 2014. Learning to solve
arithmetic word problems with verb categorization.
In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 523–533, Doha, Qatar. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Jiaxin Huang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu,
Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei Han. 2022.
Large language models can self-improve. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.11610.
Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean Senel-
lart, and Alexander Rush. 2017. OpenNMT: Open-
source toolkit for neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations, pages
67–72, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-
guage models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
35.
3502
Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ashish
Sabharwal, Oren Etzioni, and Siena Dumas Ang.
2015. Parsing algebraic word problems into equa-
tions. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 3:585–597.
Dong-Hyun Lee et al. 2013. Pseudo-label: The simple
and efficient semi-supervised learning method for
deep neural networks. In Workshop on challenges in
representation learning, ICML, volume 3, page 896.
Junlong Li, Zhuosheng Zhang, and Hai Zhao. 2022a.
Self-prompting large language models for open-
domain qa. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08635.
Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen,
Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2022b. On the
advance of making language models better reasoners.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02336.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan,
Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. What
makes good in-context examples for GPT-3? In
Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (DeeLIO
2022): The 3rd Workshop on Knowledge Extrac-
tion and Integration for Deep Learning Architectures,
pages 100–114, Dublin, Ireland and Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Aman Madaan and Amir Yazdanbakhsh. 2022. Text
and patterns: For effective chain of thought, it takes
two to tango. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07686.
Jianmo Ni, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Noah Constant,
Ji Ma, Keith Hall, Daniel Cer, and Yinfei Yang. 2022.
Sentence-t5: Scalable sentence encoders from pre-
trained text-to-text models. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022,
pages 1864–1874, Dublin, Ireland. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
2017. A deep reinforced model for abstractive sum-
marization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language mod-
els are unsupervised multitask learners.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie
Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susan-
nah Young, et al. 2021. Scaling language models:
Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-
BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Kevin Duarte, Yogesh S
Rawat, and Mubarak Shah. 2021. In defense of
pseudo-labeling: An uncertainty-aware pseudo-label
selection framework for semi-supervised learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06329.
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth. 2016. eral arithmetic word problems. arXiv:1608.01413.
Solving gen-
arXiv preprint
Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant.
2022. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context
learning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 2655–2671, Seattle, United States.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
J Schulman, B Zoph, C Kim, J Hilton, J Menick, J Weng,
JFC Uribe, L Fedus, L Metz, M Pokorny, et al. 2022.
Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue.
Weiwei Shi, Yihong Gong, Chris Ding, Zhiheng MaXi-
aoyu Tao, and Nanning Zheng. 2018. Transductive
semi-supervised deep learning using min-max fea-
tures. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 299–315.
Hongjin Su, Jungo Kasai, Chen Henry Wu, Weijia Shi,
Tianlu Wang, Jiayi Xin, Rui Zhang, Mari Ostendorf,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, et al. 2022. Selec-
tive annotation makes language models better few-
shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01975.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and
Jonathan Berant. 2019. CommonsenseQA: A ques-
tion answering challenge targeting commonsense
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
4149–4158, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam
Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze Cheng,
Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al.
2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog applica-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239.
Hado P van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, Matteo Hessel,
Volodymyr Mnih, and David Silver. 2016. Learning
values across many orders of magnitude. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 29.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Aman-
preet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy,
and Samuel Bowman. 2019. Superglue: A stick-
ier benchmark for general-purpose language under-
standing systems. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 32.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018. GLUE:
A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for nat-
ural language understanding. In Proceedings of the
3503
2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing
and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages
353–355, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le,
Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. 2022a. Self-consistency
improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Al-
isa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Han-
naneh Hajishirzi. 2022b. Self-instruct: Aligning lan-
guage model with self generated instructions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.10560.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al.
2022a. Emergent abilities of large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022b.
Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Laura Weidinger, John Mellor, Maribeth Rauh, Conor
Griffin, Jonathan Uesato, Po-Sen Huang, Myra
Cheng, Mia Glaese, Borja Balle, Atoosa Kasirzadeh,
et al. 2021. Ethical and social risks of harm from
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359.
Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Shizhu He, Kang Liu,
and Jun Zhao. 2022. Large language models are
reasoners with self-verification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.09561.
Yongqin Xian, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep Akata. 2017.
Zero-shot learning-the good, the bad and the ugly.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 4582–4591.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.
Eric Zelikman, Jesse Mu, Noah D Goodman, and
Yuhuai Tony Wu. 2022. Star: Self-taught reasoner
bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. Advances
in neural information processing systems.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex
Smola. 2022. Automatic chain of thought prompt-
ing in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.03493.
3504
Output
She staed with 23.
23 - 5 x 3 = 8. the
answer is 8
Query
LLM LLM
Output
5 bagels cost $ 15.
The rest of the
money is $ 8
A Illustrations of Zero-shot and Few-shot
CoT
We show additional illustrations of CoT prompting
techniques described in §2 in Fig. 5.
Input:
Q: Roger has 5 balls. He
buys 2 more. How many
balls does he have now?
A: He staed with 5 and
buys 2 more. 5 + 2 = 7. The
answer is 7.
Q: Olivia has $23 and
bought 5 bagels for $3
each. How much money
does she have le?
A:
Input:
Q: Olivia has $23 and
bought 5 bagels for $3
each. How much
money does she have
le?
A: Let's think step by
step.
Query
Figure 5: Few-shot (left) and zero-shot (right) CoT.
Both prompts the LLM to output intermediate steps: in
few-shot (1-shot shown in the figure, with one provided
completed question-rationale-answer set), handcrafted
in-context examples are provided and prepended to the
test questions. In the zero-shot setting, chain-of-thought
output is prompted by trigger phrases (“Let’s think step
by step.” in the figure).
B Additional Implementation Details
In this section, we describe the additional im-
plementation details for the experiments: for the
PaLM models, we follow Wang et al. (2022a) to
use a temperature of 0.7 during decoding to extract
different reasoning paths when self-consistency is
used. On GPT-3 model, we use a temperature of
0.4 (for experiments without self-consistency, we
use the default greedy decoding procedure with
a temperature of 0). Both COSP and Auto-CoT
involve the use of an auxiliary language model to
extract sentence embeddings of questions and/or
rationales. We use Sentence-T5-large (Ni et al.,
2022) for COSP. It is worth noting that Auto-CoT
(Zhang et al., 2022) originally uses SentenceBERT
(Reimers and Gurevych, 2019); for consistency we
use Sentence-T5 for Auto-CoT as well. Given that
Ni et al. (2022) show that Sentence-T5 outperforms
SentenceBERT for most sentence-level tasks, there
should only be a positive impact on the baseline per-
formances as a result of this change. For all tasks
except for GSM-8K, we set a maximum decoding
step of 128 tokens. On GSM-8K, we found that
often long responses are generated and we increase
the maximum decoding step to 256 tokens.
We also describe the additional heuristics used
to prune the pool of candidates as described in §3.2.
For demonstration selection, we reject the follow-
ing questions or rationales which are observed to
be inappropriate for our goals:
(i) Responses that feature no numbers (imple-
mented via regular expression matching) for
arithmetic tasks.
(ii) Responses that involve generated questions.
While sometimes useful, we find that in general
self-questioning is confusing, and often mislead
the LLMs to answer the generated questions
instead of the actual questions being asked.
(iii) Overly short rationales: responses containing
fewer than 5 tokens.
(iv) Overly fragmented responses: after separating
the rationales into phrases with punctuation
marks as delimiters (“[?!.,]”), we filter out
the responses that feature more than 10 frag-
ments. This is similar to the heuristic used in
Wei et al. (2022b) and Zhang et al. (2022) that
remove overly long questions and responses.
We also conduct post-processing of the LLM out-
puts for all methods by, for example, cutting off
outputs at stop tokens like “\n\n\n” and “Q:” (the
latter is to prevent the LLM from generating further
questions). For other pre- and post-processing steps
and for answer extraction procedures, we follow
Kojima et al. (2022) available at https://github.
com/kojima-takeshi188/zero_shot_cot.
For the datasets, GSM-8K, CSQA, Strat-
egyQA are licensed under the MIT license
(GSM-8K: https://github.com/openai/
grade-school-math/blob/master/LICENSE;
CSQA: https://github.com/jonathanherzig/
commonsenseqa/issues/5; StrategyQA:
https://github.com/eladsegal/strategyqa/
blob/main/LICENSE). MultiArith, Sin-
gleEq and AddSub datasets are licensed
under the CC:BY 4.0 license (https:
//www.cs.washington.edu/nlp/arithmetic).
We note that our use of these assets are consistent
with their intended use (for research and devel-
opments), and the use of them for the purpose
of evaluating LLMs is well-documented in the
literature. For all datasets, we use the same data
split as previous works like Kojima et al. (2022).
3505
Since no training data is used, we only use the test
split (when the test labels are publicly available) or
the validation/dev split (otherwise).
C Additional Results & Analyses
C.1 Outcome Entropy vs Correctness
Complementary to Fig. 3, in this section we pro-
vide additional experiments that demonstrate the
link of the outcome entropy (Eq. (6)) and ground-
truth correctness over more tasks and models. We
show the full results in Fig. 6. We show that for a
vast majority of cases, the outcome entropy is cor-
related with correctness in a statistically significant
way (in all cases except for StrategyQA on GPT-3,
the p-value testing the significance of the Point-
biserial correlation (pbc) coefficient between en-
tropy and accuracy is below 10−5. The pbc coeffi-
cient on StrategyQA/GPT-3 is 0.04), with correctly
answered questions featuring lower entropy. We
find a stronger separation in entropy distribution in
arithmetic tasks compared to the logic reasoning
tasks (i.e., CSQA and StrategyQA). We argue that
this is partly due to logic reasoning tasks consid-
ered in the paper being feature much smaller label
spaces – while the answer to the arithmetic tasks
can be any real number (essentially an infinitely-
large label space), CSQA and StrategyQA feature
multiple choice questions with 5 (choices A-E) and
2 (Yes/No) classes only, respectively. This is con-
sistent with our discussions in §7 where we argue
that the outcome entropy is more useful for large
label space where it is very unlikely for random
guessing to lead to correct answers, as opposed to
classification tasks with few possible labels. As
discussed in §7, a promising future direction is to
address this issue and to improve the effectiveness
of consistency on these types of tasks.
We further investigate the impact of the in-
context demonstrations on the entropy by separat-
ing and comparing between Stage 1 and Stage 2
entropy and we show the comparison in Fig. 7,
and we find that along with the improvement of
test accuracy as reported §5, the addition of the
demonstrations significantly also reduces the out-
come entropy across all tasks and models.
C.2 Results without Self-consistency
In this section, we report baseline results on Zero-
shot CoT, Few-shot CoT and Auto-CoT without
self-consistency on PaLM models, which are omit-
ted in Table 1 in the main text. As shown in Table
Outcome Entropy
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Correct
Wrong
MultiArith AddSub SingleEq GSM-8K CSQA StrategyQA
(a) PaLM-62B
Outcome Entropy
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Correct
Wrong
MultiArith AddSub SingleEq GSM-8K CSQA StrategyQA
(b) PaLM-650B
Outcome Entropy
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Correct
Wrong
MultiArith AddSub SingleEq GSM-8K CSQA StrategyQA
(c) GPT-3
Figure 6: Distribution of entropy (Eq. (6)) vs ground-
truth correctness using Zero-shot CoT for more tasks on
PaLM and GPT-3.
3, we find self-consistency to increase performance
across all models and tasks considered; due to this,
we always use self-consistency in COSP, and only
perform experiments with self-consistency in the
GPT models.
C.3 COSP+ Results
We perform preliminary experiments of COSP+ on
PaLM-62B model, and we report the results in Ta-
ble 4. In 5 out of 6 tasks, COSP+ leads to small
improvements but it deteriorates the performance
on GSM-8K as the additional demonstrations in
this case contain more errors and became mislead-
ing to the LLM. We argue that the results show
promise in more adaptively selecting demonstra-
tions, and we defer a thorough exploration in a
future work.
C.4 COSP-FS Results
We compare COSP-FS against Few-shot CoT with
self-consistency using PaLM-62B and GPT-3 on
GSM-8K in Table 5.
3506
Model PaLM-62B PaLM-540B
Setting 0-shot 5-shot 0-shot 5-shot
Method 0-shot Auto- 5-shot 0-shot Auto- CoT CoT CoT CoT CoT 5-shot
CoT
# Paths 1 1 1 1 1 1
MultiArith 24.5 9.2 63.9 63.5 93.8 83.5
AddSub SingleEq CSQA StrategyQA 46.7 70.6 67.8 74.4 82.0 43.2 74.0 75.9 73.6 79.3 GSM-8K 8.6 8.7 22.7 39.8 46.6 41.8
41.8 63.7 57.1 66.9 64.7 57.2 55.1 56.3 53.0 67.6 83.8
84.9
80.2
76.2
(Average) 37.00 46.88 57.28 61.87 72.33 75.05
Table 3: Baseline results on PaLM-62B (Left) and PaLM-540B (Right) (Chowdhery et al., 2022) without using
self-consistency (i.e. argmax sampling). Except for not using self-consistency and the use of the zero temperature,
all experimental setup is otherwise identical to that in Table 1.
Outcome Entropy
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Model PaLM-62B
# Paths Setting 0-shot
Method COSP COSP+
(Ours) (Ours)
7+7 7+7
Stage1
Stage2
MultiArith AddSub SingleEq GSM-8K CSQA StrategyQA
(a) PaLM-62B
MultiArith 85.0 86.2
AddSub 78.9 79.2
SingleEq 78.7 78.9
GSM-8K 30.2 28.2
CSQA 60.2 60.3
StrategyQA 64.7 65.1
Outcome Entropy
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
(Average) 66.28 66.32
Stage1
Stage2
MultiArith AddSub SingleEq GSM-8K CSQA StrategyQA
(b) PaLM-540B
Figure 7: Distribution of entropy (Eq. (6)) in Stage 1
(i.e. first msampling paths with Zero-shot CoT with-
out demonstrations) and in Stage 2 (i.e. the second m
sampling paths after demonstrations are prepended) in
PaLM models.
C.5 Failure Analysis
In this section we conduct analysis in cases where
demonstrations do not lead to performance im-
provement or even leads to performance deteriora-
tion. The only case where COSP performs worse
than the Zero-shot CoT is on the GSM-8K task on
GPT-3. We show some of the identified demon-
strations on this particular task-model combination
in Table 7 in App. D, and we find that in this
case, due to the extreme difficulty of the task to the
model most of the generated demonstrations are
wrong. On the other hand, competing methods like
Auto-CoT lead to such performance deterioration
more frequently. Intuitively, unlike COSP where
Table 4: Comparison between COSP and COSP+ on
PaLM-62B. While COSP uniformly uses 5 in-context
demonstrations per question, COSP+ uses an adaptive
number of demonstrations per sample proportional to
the outcome entropy of the test question in Stage 1 (Eq.
(6)) and uses a minimum of 5 and up to 8 demonstrations
per sample. The COSP results are lifted from Table 1.
we use self-consistency to approximate correctness,
the decision of Auto-CoT on which question and
rationale to include entirely hinges on the ques-
tion embedding, and when the initial Zero-shot per-
formance is low, most of the generated responses
would be erroneous. We find that such deteriora-
tion indeed happens more frequently in the smaller
models and/or more difficult tasks where the LLMs
rely more on in-context examples for guidance (we
give an example in Table 6. On the other hand, in
larger models like PaLM-540B with strong Zero-
shot performance and whose errors are more likely
due to minor flaws in reasoning (e.g. arithmetic
mistakes in a single step) rather than major issues
(e.g. repetitions, gibberish outputs & major seman-
tic misunderstanding), we find that consistent with
the arguments in §5.5 of Zhang et al. (2022), the
3507
Model GPT-3 PaLM-62B
Setting 5-shot
# Paths Method Manual COSP- 5-shot COSP-
CoT FS CoT FS
14 7+7 14 7+7
GSM-8K 16.7 17.7 30.3 30.8
Table 5: COSP-FS results.
results are indeed less sensitive to flawed demon-
strations.
D Examples of Generated
Demonstrations
We show some of the generated demonstrations in
various datasets in Table 7 (GPT-3) and Table 8
(PaLM).
3508
COSP Q: Irwin ’s family went on a camping trip in the mountains . On the first day , they hiked from their car to the
campsite . First , they hiked 0.2 mile from the car to a stream , and 0.4 mile from the stream to a meadow . Then
they hiked 0.1 mile from the meadow to the campsite . How many miles did Irwin ’s family hike in all ? A: Let’s
think step by step. First, they hiked 0.2 miles from their car to the stream. Then, they hiked 0.4 miles from the
stream to the meadow. Finally, they hiked 0.1 miles from the meadow to the campsite. So, the total distance is
0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 = 0.7 miles. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 0.7. ✓
Q: Joan purchased a basketball game for $ 5.20 , and a racing game for $ 4.23 . How much did Joan
spend on video games ? A: Let’s think step by step. 1. Joan purchased a basketball game for $ 5.20 , and a racing
game for $ 4.23 . 2. $ 5.20 + $ 4.23 = $ 9.43 3. $ 9.43 is the total amount spent on video games. Therefore, the
answer (arabic numerals) is 9.43. ✓
Q: Jason has 7 violet balloons and 4 red balloons . He lost 3 of the violet balloons . How many vio-
let balloons does Jason have now ? A: Let’s think step by step. 7 - 3 = 4 4 = 4 So, he has 4 violet balloons now.
Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 4. ✓
Q: Joan decided to sell all of her old books . She gathered up 33 books to sell . She sold 26 books
in a yard sale . How many books does Joan now have ? A: Let’s think step by step. 1. 33 books - 26 books = 7
books 2. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 7. ✓
Q: Keith grew 6 turnips . Alyssa grew 9 turnips . How many turnips did they grow in all ? A: Let’s
think step by step. 1. Keith grew 6 turnips. 2. Alyssa grew 9 turnips. 3. So in total, they grew 15 turnips.
Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 15. ✓
Auto-
CoT
Q: Sally picked 7 lemons and Mary picked 9 lemons from the lemon tree . How many lemons were picked in
total ? A: Let’s think step by step. Sally picked 7 lemons. Mary picked 9 lemons. So, 14 lemons were picked in
total. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 14. ×
Q: Sally had 27 Pokemon cards . Dan gave her 41 new Pokemon cards . Sally bought 20 Pokemon
cards . How many Pokemon cards does Sally have now ? A: Let’s think step by step. Sally had 27 Pokemon
cards. Dan gave her 41 new Pokemon cards. Sally bought 20 Pokemon cards. How many Pokemon cards does
Sally have now? Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 27. ×
Q: Mary had 21 dimes and 38 pennies in her bank . Her dad borrowed 18 pennies from Mary . How
many pennies does she have now ? A: Let’s think step by step. Step 1: 21 dimes + 38 pennies = 59 pennies Step
2: 18 pennies - 18 pennies = 0 pennies Step 3: 59 - 0 = 59 pennies Step 4: 59 pennies = 59 Step 5: 59 pennies =
59 pennies Step 6: 59 pennies = 59 Step 7: 59 = 59 Step 8: Therefore, Mary has 59 pennies. Therefore, the
answer (arabic numerals) is 59. ×
Q: There are 33 oak trees currently in the park . Park workers had to cut down 18 oak trees that were
damaged . How many oak trees will be in the park when the workers are finished ? A: Let’s think step by step. -
First, we know that 18 trees were cut down. - 18 trees were cut down, so there were originally 15 trees. - 15 - 18
= -3 trees, so there will be 3 new oak trees in the park. - 33 - 3 = 30 trees, so there will be 30 oak trees in the park
when the workers are finished. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 30. ×
Q: When Jake had 1 cat , he needed to serve 0.5 can of cat food each day . Now that Jake has
adopted a second cat , he needs to serve a total of 0.9 can each day . How much extra food is needed to feed the
second cat ? A: Let’s think step by step. - First, we need to find the total number of cans needed to feed both
cats. - Then, we need to find the difference between the total number of cans and the number of cans needed to
feed one cat. - Finally, we need to find the number of cans needed to feed the second cat. - The answer is the
number of cans needed to feed the second cat. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 0.9. ×
Table 6: Comparison between the demonstrations identified by COSP and Auto-CoT on the AddSub task using
GPT-3. In this case, the COSP demonstrations lead to 18% improvement over Zero-shot CoT with self-consistency
whereas AutoCoT demonstration led to performance deterioration. Reasoning steps are highlighted: correct,
questionable/incomplete/repetitive/irrelevant and erroneous, and the ground-truth correctness of the demonstrations
(unavailable to the LLM) marked by ✓ or ×at the end of the responses.
3509
Dataset Demonstrations
Multi
Arith
SingleEq GSM-
8K
Q: Debby’s class is going on a field trip to the zoo. If each van can hold 4 people and there are 2 students and 6
adults going, how many vans will they need? A: Let’s think step by step. First, we’ll figure out how many people
are going. 2 students and 6 adults. So, 8 people. Then, we divide the number of people by the number of people
in a van. 8 people divided by 4 people per van = 2 vans. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 2. ✓
Q: Nancy had 80 files on her computer. files in each one. How many folders did Nancy end up with? A: Let’s think step by step. She deleted 31 files, so
she had 80 - 31 = 49 files. She put 7 files in each folder, so she had 49 / 7 = 7 folders. Therefore, the answer
She deleted 31 of them and put the rest into folders with 7
(arabic numerals) is 7. ✓
Q: At the arcade, Tom won 32 tickets playing ’whack a mole’ and 25 tickets playing ’skee ball’. If
he spent 7 of his tickets on a hat, how many tickets does Tom have left? A: Let’s think step by step. He has 32 +
Q: The schools debate team had 5 boys and 40 girls on it. 25 = 57 tickets. He spends 7 on a hat, so he has 50 left. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 50 ✓
If they were split into groups of 9 how
many groups could they make? A: Let’s think step by step. 5 boys and 40 girls = 45 students Let’s take 9
students per group. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 5. ✓
Q: Mike has 87 baseball cards. Sam bought 13 of Mike’s baseball cards. How many baseball cards does Mike
have now ? A: Let’s think step by step. 13 of Mike’s baseball cards are with Sam. So, 87 - 13 = 74. Then, Mike
has 74 baseball cards now. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 74.✓
Q: Sam had 98 pennies in his bank. He spent 93 of his pennies. now ? A: Let’s think step by step. 1. Sam had 98 pennies in his bank. How many pennies does he have
2. He spent 93 pennies, so the amount of
pennies he has left is 5. 3. So, Sam has 5 pennies now. """ # Solution # Sam had 98 pennies in his bank. # He
spent 93 pennies, so the amount of pennies he has left is 5. # So, Sam has 5 pennies now. # 2. Therefore, the
answer (arabic numerals) is 5. ✓
Q: Nancy goes fishing with Joan. will each one get ? A: Let’s think step by step. First, we divide the total number of trout by the number of people.
They catch 18 trout. If they equally split up the trout, how many
The answer is 9. So, each person catches 9 trout. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 9. ✓
Q: Mrs. Hilt baked pies last weekend for a holiday dinner. She baked 16 pecan pies and 14 apples
pies. If she wants to arrange all of the pies in rows of 5 pies each, how many rows will she have? A: Let’s think
step by step. the answer (arabic numerals) is 6. ✓
16 pecan pies + 14 apples pies = 30 pies. 30 pies / 5 pies per row = 6 rows. So, 6 rows. Therefore,
Q: Two thirds of Jana’s puppies are Pomeranians. One third of the Pomeranians are girls. If there are 6
Pomeranian girls, how many puppies does Jana have? A: Let’s think step by step. First, we’ll look at the full set
of options for Jana’s puppies: Puppies: Jana’s puppes are Pomeranians and are either girls or boys. Pomeranians:
Jana’s puppies are Pomeranians. Girls: Jana’s puppies are girls. Boys: Jana’s puppies are boys. Let’s look at the
information we have, and see what we know for sure. Jana has 6 puppies. Jana’s puppies are all Pomeranians.
Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 6. ×
Q: If one person can paint half a house in 5 days, how many hours would it take for 5 people to paint
a whole house? A: Let’s think step by step. 1. Half a house can be painted in 5 days by 1 person. 2. 5 people can
paint half a house in 5 days. 3. 5 people can paint a whole house in 5 days. So the answer is 5 days. Therefore,
the answer (arabic numerals) is 5. ×
Q: The local firefighters are doing a “fill the boot” fundraiser. Their goal is to raise $6300. After the
first 3 hours, they have raised $2100. For how many hours do they have to fundraise in total to reach their goal,
assuming an equal amount raised in every hour? A: Let’s think step by step. We know that the total amount
raised is equal to the total number of hours multiplied by the amount raised per hour. Total amount raised = Total
number of hours * amount raised per hour $6300 = 3 * $2100 $6300 / $2100 = 3 So, the total number of hours
is 3. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 3. ×
John drank 2 glasses of milk. Each glass
had 8 ounces. Each ounce had 3 calories. So, John consumed 2 x 8 x 3 = 48 calories. Therefore, the answer
Q: A glass of milk is 8 ounces of milk. John drinks 2 glasses of milk. ounce how many calories did he consume? A: Let’s think step by step. If milk has 3 calories per
(arabic numerals) is 48. ✓
3510
CSQA Q: What are our bodies doing after having food? Answer Choices: (A) falling down (B) digesting (C) gas (D)
weight gain (E) not hungry A: Let’s think step by step. After having food, our bodies are digesting it. Digestion
is the process by which food is broken down into simpler substances. Therefore, among A through E, the answer
is B. ✓
Q: The wood was still rough to the touch, what did the woodworker have to do? (A) petrify (B) sanded (C) warp (D) composted (E) clean A: Let’s think step by step. Answer Choices:
First, the woodworker had
to petrify the rough wood. Then, the woodworker had to sand the petrified wood. Finally, the woodworker had to
warp the sanded wood. Therefore, among A through E, the answer is B. ✓
Q: What type of store would have lots of sports equipment? supply store (C) school (D) sporting goods store (E) sporting event A: Let’s think step by step. I’m a sports fan. I
would go to sporting events, not to malls. Therefore, among A through E, the answer is D. ✓
Answer Choices: (A) mall (B) office
Q: What do people aim to do at work? Answer Choices: (A) complete job (B) learn from each other
(C) kill animals (D) wear hats (E) talk to each other A: Let’s think step by step. People aim to do their jobs.
Therefore, among A through E, the answer is A. ✓
Strategy
QA
Q: Has the Indian Ocean garbage patch not completed two full rotations of debris since its discovery? A: Let’s
think step by step. The Indian Ocean garbage patch is approximately 10% of the size of the North Pacific
garbage patch. This means that even if the Indian Ocean garbage patch has completed two full rotations of debris,
it will still only be 1/10th of the size of the North Pacific garbage patch. Therefore, the answer (Yes or No) is no. ×
Q: Was Christina Aguilera born in the forgotten borough? A: Let’s think step by step. 1. Christina 2.
Aguilera 3. was 4. born 5. in 6. the 7. forgotten 8. Therefore, the answer (Yes or No) is yes.×
A: Let’s think step by step. Q: Karachi was a part of Alexander the Great’s success? 1. Alexander
the Great had a huge army. 2. Karachi was a part of the empire of Alexander the Great. 3. Therefore, Alexander
the Great had a huge army. 4. Therefore, Karachi was a part of Alexander the Great’s success. Therefore, the
answer (Yes or No) is no. ✓
Q: Was Jean Valjean imprisoned due to hunger? A: Let’s think step by step. yes 1. Jean Valjean was
imprisoned for stealing bread. 2. He was imprisoned for stealing bread because he was hungry. 3. Therefore, the
answer (Yes or No) is yes. Therefore, the answer (Yes or No) is yes. ✓
Table 7: Annotated examples of generated demonstrations selected by COSP on GPT-3. Similar to Table 6,
reasoning steps are highlighted: correct, questionable/incomplete/repetitive/irrelevant and erroneous, and the
responses.
ground-truth correctness of the demonstrations (unavailable to the LLM) marked by ✓ or ×at the end of the
3511
Dataset Demonstrations
GSM-
8K
Q: Bruce works for 5 hours on Tuesday. On Wednesday he works twice the time he works on Tuesday. On
Thursday he works 2 hours less than the time he works on Wednesday. How many hours does Bruce work in all
these three days? A: Let’s think step by step. On Tuesday, Bruce works for 5 hours. On Wednesday, Bruce
works for 2 * 5 = 10 hours. On Thursday, Bruce works for 10 - 2 = 8 hours. So, in all three days, Bruce works
Q: Mark decides to buy packs of old magic cards and open them to sell. He buys 3 packs for $1800
each. He gets 1 card that is worth $4000 and another card worth $1000. There are 30 more cards worth an
average of $50 each. How much money profit did he make? A: Let’s think step by step. for 5 + 10 + 8 = 23 hours. Therefore, the answer (arabic numerals) is 23. ✓
numerals) is 100. ✓
He spent $1800 * 3 =
$5400. He got $4000 + $1000 + $50 * 30 = $5500. So he made $100 profit. Therefore, the answer (arabic
CSQA Q: Where would someone purchase an upright piano? Answer Choices: (A) music class (B) college (C) music
store (D) music room (E) music band A: Let’s think step by step. You can’t buy a piano in a music class, college,
or room. And an upright piano is not in a music band. The correct answer is a music store. Therefore, among A
through E, the answer is C. ✓
Q: John got his tax refund back. He treated it like it was what? Answer Choices: (A) candy (B)
death and (C) free money (D) discount (E) credit A: Let’s think step by step. The first thing John did when he
got his tax refund was to spend it on his girlfriend. The second thing he did was to spend it on a big-screen TV.
The correct answer is C. Therefore, among A through E, the answer is C. ✓
Q: How are the conditions for someone who is living in a homeless shelter? sometimes bad (B) happy (C) respiration (D) growing older (E) death A: Let’s think step by step. The answer is
Answer Choices: (A)
choice A because the passage describes that homeless people have poor health. Therefore, among A through E,
the answer is A. ✓
Table 8: Annotated examples of generated demonstrations selected by COSP on PaLM-540B. See explanations of
the annotations in Table 7
3512
ACL 2023 Responsible NLP Checklist
A For every submission:
 A1. Did you describe the limitations of your work?
Section 7 is dedicated for discussions of limitations. We also include Failure Analysis in Appendix
C.5.
 A2. Did you discuss any potential risks of your work?
We discuss potential ethical and social risks in Section 7.
 A3. Do the abstract and introduction summarize the paper’s main claims?
Abstract and Introduction (Section 1) summarise main claims.
# A4. Have you used AI writing assistants when working on this paper?
Left blank.
B  Did you use or create scientific artifacts?
Section 5. Used scientific artefacts.
 B1. Did you cite the creators of artifacts you used?
Section 5
 B2. Did you discuss the license or terms for use and / or distribution of any artifacts?
Appendix B
 B3. Did you discuss if your use of existing artifact(s) was consistent with their intended use, provided
that it was specified? For the artifacts you create, do you specify intended use and whether that is
compatible with the original access conditions (in particular, derivatives of data accessed for research
purposes should not be used outside of research contexts)?
Appendix B
B4. Did you discuss the steps taken to check whether the data that was collected / used contains any
information that names or uniquely identifies individual people or offensive content, and the steps
taken to protect / anonymize it?
Not applicable. Left blank.
 B5. Did you provide documentation of the artifacts, e.g., coverage of domains, languages, and
linguistic phenomena, demographic groups represented, etc.?
Section 5 and Appendix B. We gave high-level information about these assets: e.g. arithmetic
reasoning, logical reasoning, etc.
 B6. Did you report relevant statistics like the number of examples, details of train / test / dev splits,
etc. for the data that you used / created? Even for commonly-used benchmark datasets, include the
number of examples in train / validation / test splits, as these provide necessary context for a reader
to understand experimental results. For example, small differences in accuracy on large test sets may
be significant, while on small test sets they may not be.
Appendix B
C  Did you run computational experiments?
Section 5 & Appendix C.
 C1. Did you report the number of parameters in the models used, the total computational budget
(e.g., GPU hours), and computing infrastructure used?
Section 5 & Appendix B
The Responsible NLP Checklist used at ACL 2023 is adopted from NAACL 2022, with the addition of a question on AI writing
3513
assistance.
 C2. Did you discuss the experimental setup, including hyperparameter search and best-found
hyperparameter values?
Section 5 & Appendix B
 C3. Did you report descriptive statistics about your results (e.g., error bars around results, summary
statistics from sets of experiments), and is it transparent whether you are reporting the max, mean,
etc. or just a single run?
Section 5 & Appendix C.
 C4. If you used existing packages (e.g., for preprocessing, for normalization, or for evaluation), did
you report the implementation, model, and parameter settings used (e.g., NLTK, Spacy, ROUGE,
etc.)?
Section 5 & Appendix B
D # Did you use human annotators (e.g., crowdworkers) or research with human participants?
Left blank.
D1. Did you report the full text of instructions given to participants, including e.g., screenshots,
disclaimers of any risks to participants or annotators, etc.?
Not applicable. Left blank.
D2. Did you report information about how you recruited (e.g., crowdsourcing platform, students)
and paid participants, and discuss if such payment is adequate given the participants’ demographic
(e.g., country of residence)?
Not applicable. Left blank.
D3. Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
using/curating? For example, if you collected data via crowdsourcing, did your instructions to
crowdworkers explain how the data would be used?
Not applicable. Left blank.
D4. Was the data collection protocol approved (or determined exempt) by an ethics review board?
Not applicable. Left blank.
D5. Did you report the basic demographic and geographic characteristics of the annotator population
that is the source of the data?
Not applicable. Left blank.
3514
