arXiv:2602.00997v1 [cs.AI] 1 Feb 2026
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Mayank Singh 1 Vikas Yadav 2 Eduardo Blanco 1
Abstract
Automatic Prompt Optimization (APO) is a pow-
erful approach for extracting performance from
large language models without modifying their
weights. Many existing methods rely on trial-and-
error, testing different prompts or in-context ex-
amples until a good configuration emerges, often
consuming substantial compute. Recently, nat-
ural language feedback derived from execution
logs has shown promise as a way to identify how
prompts can be improved. However, most prior
approaches operate in a bottom-up manner, iter-
atively adjusting the prompt based on feedback
from individual problems, which can cause them
to lose the global perspective. In this work, we
propose Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Opti-
mization (ETGPO), a prompt optimization algo-
rithm that adopts a top-down approach. ETGPO
focuses on the global failure landscape by collect-
ing model errors, categorizing them into a taxon-
omy, and augmenting the prompt with guidance
targeting the most frequent failure modes. Across
Preprint. February 3, 2026.
Error Collection
K runs on validation set
Error Taxonomy Creation
Categorize failed traces
Category Selection
Select top G categories
Guidance Generation
Generate actionable guidance
Optimized Prompt
failed traces
error taxonomy
selected categories
final prompt
Figure 1. Overview of ETGPO. We first collect errors from failed
traces and then organize them into a taxonomy. After filtering
multiple benchmarks spanning mathematics, ques-
to the most prevalent error categories, we generate actionable
tion answering, and logical reasoning, ETGPO
guidance for each and combine them into the final prompt. This
achieves accuracy that is comparable to or bet-
entire process is automated end-to-end.
ter than state-of-the-art methods, while requiring
roughly one third of the optimization-phase token
usage and evaluation budget.
framed prompt design as a black-box optimization prob-
lem; OPRO (Yang et al., 2024), which showed that LLMs
can optimize prompts by learning from past attempts; and
1. Introduction
ProTeGi (Pryzant et al., 2023), which introduced feedback-
driven refinement using natural language critiques.
Large language models (LLMs) are sensitive to prompt
Since then, diverse approaches have emerged: evolutionary
wording, structure, and examples, making prompt design an
methods that evolve prompts through mutation and com-
effective mechanism for improving task performance with-
bination (Guo et al., 2024; Fernando et al., 2024), history-
out modifying model weights. However, manual prompt
informed methods that use Bayesian optimization to guide
design requires expertise, trial-and-error, and effort. This
search (Opsahl-Ong et al., 2024), and further feedback-
has motivated a growing body of work on Automatic Prompt
driven methods that refine prompts based on execution
Optimization (APO), which treats prompt design as an op-
errors (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024; Agarwal et al., 2025;
timization problem over discrete natural-language strings.
Agrawal et al., 2025).
Early approaches include APE (Zhou et al., 2023), which
We focus on feedback-driven approaches, which have shown
1University of Arizona 2ServiceNow. Correspondence to:
Mayank Singh <mayanks43@arizona.edu>.
strong empirical gains but operate bottom-up: they collect
errors on small batches and immediately edit the prompt,
risking overfitting to specific examples. To mitigate this,
1
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
they allocate substantial budget to repeatedly evaluating
each candidate on a validation set (Agrawal et al., 2025).
To address these issues, we propose Error Taxonomy-
Guided Prompt Optimization (ETGPO), a top-down APO
method that explicitly models the dataset-level error land-
scape through an error taxonomy. The taxonomy organizes
errors found in the execution traces of a base prompt into
error categories, along with their prevalence statistics, pro-
viding an interpretable view of the errors the LLM makes
on the domain of interest. This structure allows us to gen-
erate targeted guidance only for the most prevalent error
categories. By filtering out long-tail errors, we ensure that
prompt edits are more likely to generalize beyond specific
problems, reducing the need for iterative validation and
improving overall efficiency.
In summary, our contributions are 1:
1. We propose ETGPO, a top-down approach to APO that
builds a global error taxonomy and generates guidance
for prevalent failure modes. ETGPO is independent of
the task and choice of LLM, while also providing an
interpretable view of the target LLM’s weaknesses.
2. We show that ETGPO matches or outperforms state-of-
the-art methods on benchmarks spanning mathematics,
question answering, and logical reasoning.
3. We achieve this at roughly one third of the optimization
cost, demonstrating that a simpler approach can replace
expensive iterative refinement.
2. Related Work
There exist many APO methods in the literature, and they
can be classified in several different ways. For our pur-
poses, we group them into three categories based on how
new candidates are proposed: feedback-driven, evolutionary,
and history-informed methods, and discuss representative
approaches within each category.
Feedback-driven approaches iteratively refine a prompt by
analyzing its performance on examples and using that cri-
tique to guide edits. ProTeGi (Pryzant et al., 2023) itera-
tively collects errors on mini-batches of training examples,
uses an LLM to summarize what went wrong, and edits
the prompt accordingly. It maintains multiple candidates
via beam search, selecting the best by validation perfor-
mance. TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024) frames prompt
optimization as gradient descent, where an LLM generates
critiques of outputs and another LLM edits the prompt to
address them. It follows a single optimization trajectory
rather than maintaining multiple candidates via beam search.
PromptWizard (Agarwal et al., 2025) also uses an LLM to
analyze reasoning failures, identify prompt weaknesses, and
1Code at: https://github.com/mayanks43/etgpo
improve the prompt. However, unlike TextGrad, it addi-
tionally collects in-context examples from successful runs,
jointly optimizing the prompt and in-context examples.
Evolutionary methods maintain multiple prompt candidates,
evolving them through combination and mutation while
discarding weaker candidates. EvoPrompt (Guo et al., 2024)
maintains a pool of prompt candidates and uses an LLM to
combine or rewrite them, filtering to top-k after each round.
PromptBreeder (Fernando et al., 2024) extends EvoPrompt
by evolving both the task prompts and the prompts used to
mutate them, so the system learns better mutation strategies
over time. GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2025) is a hybrid method
that mutates and combines prompts based on execution
feedback while maintaining a diverse population where each
candidate excels on a different subset of examples, with the
best prompt selected by overall coverage.
History-informed methods improve prompts iteratively, us-
ing the trajectory of past attempts and their scores to inform
new candidates. OPRO (Yang et al., 2024) uses an LLM to
propose new prompts while showing it the history of past
prompts and their scores, letting it learn from previous at-
tempts. APE (Zhou et al., 2023) uses an LLM to generate
prompt candidates and iteratively refines them by paraphras-
ing top performers, treating successful prompts as implicit
historical guidance. MIPRO (Opsahl-Ong et al., 2024) also
uses an LLM to generate prompt candidates, but additionally
optimizes in-context examples from successful runs, using
Bayesian optimization to select promising combinations.
ETGPO, our method, is feedback-driven but takes a different
approach than existing methods. Rather than maintaining
multiple prompt candidates like evolutionary and history-
informed methods, or iteratively editing based on individual
errors like other feedback-driven methods, ETGPO builds a
global error taxonomy and generates targeted guidance for
the most prevalent failure modes. This top-down approach
enables surgical, high-impact interventions, reducing the
need for repeated candidate evaluations and lowering overall
optimization cost.
3. Method
Before describing our method, we introduce the problem
setting and some necessary definitions.
We consider a dataset of problems, each with a ground-
truth answer. We are also given a base system prompt,
which is used to query a large language model together
with the problem text to produce a predicted answer. The
goal of automatic prompt optimization is to improve this
base system prompt by appending additional text such that
the accuracy of the model’s responses, measured against
the ground-truth answers, improves over the dataset under
consideration overall.
2
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
We now introduce the definitions. First, we distinguish
between two types of LLMs used in our method. The back-
bone LLM is the model used to solve problems in the dataset
under consideration (i.e., generate reasoning traces and an-
swers). The optimizer LLM is the model used to improve
the system prompt that is passed to the backbone LLM.
Second, we define failed traces as the reasoning traces of
problems in the dataset for which the backbone LLM fails
to produce the correct answer. Third, we define an error
taxonomy as a categorization of the errors identified in the
failed traces, along with their prevalence statistics. Fourth,
we define guidance as a set of instructional text designed to
prevent the kinds of errors described by the error taxonomy.
Next, we describe ETGPO, our method. It consists of four
steps: (1) error collection, (2) error taxonomy creation, (3)
error category selection, and (4) guidance generation. We
describe each step in detail below:
3.1. Error Collection
In the first step, we take the validation set of the dataset at
hand together with the base system prompt and query the
backbone LLM on this set of problems. We then collect
the failed traces, along with the problem statements, correct
answers, and predicted answers. Rather than making a
single pass over the validation set, we perform K runs to
capture the variety of errors that can arise from the same
problem due to the LLM’s stochastic nature.
3.2. Error Taxonomy Creation
We next create a taxonomy of the errors found in the failed
traces. For each failed trace, we prompt the optimizer LLM
to analyze the problem, given the problem statement, the
correct answer, the model’s reasoning trace, and the model’s
predicted answer. The optimizer LLM is asked to identify
where the reasoning first goes wrong, determine the nature
of the error, and explain why this error led to an incorrect
answer. Based on this analysis, the LLM assigns the trace
to an error category.
In practice, the number of failed traces can be large, which
risks exceeding the context length of the optimizer LLM.
To address this, we perform taxonomy creation in a batched
manner. In the first call, we provide the optimizer LLM with
a batch of B failed traces, along with their associated infor-
mation as described above, and ask it to group them into
categories based on the error analysis. In response, the LLM
assigns each trace to a newly created error category and pro-
duces auxiliary information for each category, including a
summary, a description, an example, the error type, and an
explanation of why the error leads to an incorrect answer.
Each error category is required to be self-contained and un-
derstandable without reference to the original problems, so
Algorithm 1 Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Input: Validation set V , base prompt P , backbone LLM,
optimizer LLM
Parameters: K (collection runs), B (batch size), G (max
error categories)
Output: Optimized prompt P ∗
// Step 1: Error Collection
F ←∅
for k = 1 to K do
for each problem in V do
Query backbone LLM with P and problem
if prediction is incorrect then
Add (problem, trace, prediction) to F
end if
end for
end for
// Step 2: Error Taxonomy Creation
C ←∅
for each batch of B traces in F do
Use optimizer LLM to identify error categories
Update C with new or existing error categories
end for
// Step 3: Error Category Selection
Filter C to error categories with ≥2 problems
Sort C by failure count (descending)
S ←top G error categories from C
// Step 4: Guidance Generation
Use optimizer LLM to generate guidance for S
P ∗ ←P + preamble + guidance texts
return P ∗
that the resulting guidance generalizes beyond the specific
examples encountered during optimization.
In subsequent calls, we repeat this process with the addi-
tional constraint that the LLM should reuse existing error
categories whenever possible. Accordingly, in these calls,
we also provide the LLM with the current set of error cat-
egories, along with metadata such as the number of traces
assigned to each category so far. At the end of this process,
we obtain a set of error categories that form the error tax-
onomy, together with their prevalence statistics. The full
prompt for this step is provided in Section B.
3.3. Error Category Selection
After building the error taxonomy, we select a subset of
error categories for generating guidance that helps the back-
bone LLM avoid such errors. Using all error categories is
impractical for several reasons: it would result in an overly
3
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Original System Prompt
Please think step by step and then solve the task.
System Prompt Generated by ETGPO
Please think step by step and then solve the task.
To maximize accuracy on challenging math problems, carefully follow these targeted instructions for each common error type. Each
guidance item below addresses a specific failure pattern and provides actionable steps and examples to help you avoid systematic
mistakes.
1. Algebraic or Geometric Calculation Error
Description: This error occurs when you make mistakes in algebraic manipulations, geometric calculations, or applying formulas,
even after setting up the correct equations or relationships. These mistakes can include sign errors, incorrect formula usage, or
miscalculating distances or intersections.
Actionable Advice:
• Double-check every algebraic manipulation and calculation step, especially in multi-step derivations.
• Explicitly write out each step, and verify intermediate results before proceeding.
• For geometric problems, use coordinates or explicit constructions where possible, and check all distances and relationships
carefully.
• After obtaining a result, substitute it back into the original equations or geometric setup to verify correctness.
WRONG Example: You are given an equilateral triangle inscribed in a circle, and certain tangent circles. You miscalculate the
distances between centers or intersection points, leading to an answer of 16 instead of the correct 378.
CORRECT Example: You carefully assign coordinates to all relevant points, write out the equations for the circles and lines, and
check all calculations step by step. After finding the side length, you substitute it back into the geometric relationships to confirm it
fits all constraints, arriving at the correct answer of 378.
2. Incorrect Generalization from Patterns or Heuristics
Description: This error happens when you assume a general pattern or heuristic applies based on limited data or intuition, without
rigorous justification. You may extrapolate from a few computed terms or from a perceived similarity to a well-known sequence,
leading to an incorrect generalization.
Actionable Advice:
• Do not assume a pattern holds unless you can rigorously prove it for all relevant cases.
• Avoid drawing conclusions from a small number of computed terms; instead, analyze the underlying structure or derive a
general formula.
• If you suspect a pattern, attempt to prove it by induction or by analyzing the problem’s constraints.
• Always check for exceptions or edge cases that might break the pattern.
[ . . . additional guidance items omitted for brevity . . . ]
Figure 2. Comparison between the original system prompt and the ETGPO-optimized prompt for AIME, using GPT-4.1-mini as the
backbone model and GPT-4.1 as the optimizer model. The complete optimized prompt has 10 blocks, of which only the first block and a
portion of the second are shown.
long prompt, and many categories are rare or occur in only
a single problem. Focusing on the most common errors is
likely to have greater impact.
For these reasons, we focus on selecting the most important
error categories. For each error category, we obtain two
types of statistics from the previous step: the problem count,
defined as the number of unique problems exhibiting the
error, and the failure count, defined as the number of failed
traces associated with the category. To avoid optimizing
for error categories that are overly specific to individual
problems, we filter out categories associated with only a
single problem. After this filtering step, we select the top G
error categories by failure count for guidance generation in
the next step.
3.4. Guidance Generation
We next generate actionable guidance text for each selected
error category. We prompt the optimizer LLM with infor-
mation about each category, including its description, an
example, and an explanation of why it leads to an incorrect
answer, and ask it to produce guidance text for each cate-
gory. The LLM is tasked with generating actionable advice
together with concrete incorrect and correct examples. In
addition, the LLM generates a preamble that introduces the
guidance. All guidance texts for the selected error cate-
gories, along with the preamble, are generated in a single
LLM call. After receiving the response from the LLM, the
preamble and guidance texts are appended to the original
system prompt. The output of this step is the final improved
system prompt. The full prompt used to query the optimizer
LLM in this step is provided in Section C. Figure 2 shows
an example prompt generated by our method. Additional
ETGPO-generated prompts are provided in Section D.
4
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Table 1. Results (mean accuracy with confidence intervals across all runs) obtained using basic chain-of-thought and three automatic
prompt optimization methods, with GPT-4.1-mini used as the backbone model and GPT-4.1 used as the optimizer. ETGPO (our method)
outperforms prior methods on average and on all but one benchmark. Note: Bold = best; underline = second-best.
Method Math Reasoning General Multi-hop Logical Reasoning Avg.
AIME HMMT MMLU-Pro Musique AR-LSAT FOLIO
Chain of Thought 47.08 ± 1.43 47.14 ± 1.23 78.82 ± 0.30 74.25 ± 0.63 74.35 ± 0.91 75.09 ± 0.67 66.12
MIPROv2 47.66 ± 1.22 45.89 ± 1.31 78.37 ± 0.42 75.20 ± 0.60 76.36 ± 1.11 79.71 ± 0.92 67.20
GEPA 49.06 ± 1.51 47.86 ± 1.38 79.55 ± 0.58 76.35 ± 0.51 75.60 ± 0.98 77.83 ± 0.90 67.71
ETGPO (Ours) 49.06 ± 1.36 50.47 ± 1.28 79.40 ± 0.66 77.30 ± 0.45 76.93 ± 0.76 81.34 ± 0.60 69.08
Table 2. Optimization-phase token usage (total input plus output tokens, truncated to thousands) for three automatic prompt optimization
methods, with GPT-4.1-mini used as the backbone model and GPT-4.1 used as the optimizer. The ∆ column denotes the ratio of each
method’s average token usage to that of ETGPO. ETGPO (our method) consistently uses the fewest tokens across all benchmarks.
Note: Bold = lowest; underline = second-lowest.
Method AIME HMMT MMLU-Pro Musique AR-LSAT FOLIO Avg. ∆
MIPROv2 14,332 11,629 3,859 23,735 6,954 2,275 10,464 4.6×
GEPA 12,495 10,249 2,623 6,093 5,144 2,320 6,487 2.8×
ETGPO (Ours) 4,377 4,025 595 2,849 1,372 453 2,279—
We experiment with two styles of guidance: a short style,
consisting of one to two sentences per error category, and
a detailed style, which includes a full description, action-
able advice, and incorrect and correct examples. We later
perform an ablation study comparing these two styles.
4. Evaluation
In this section, we discuss the evaluation setup and results
for our method on various datasets.
4.1. Datasets
We evaluate our method on six datasets spanning multiple
domains: two mathematics datasets (AIME, HMMT), gen-
eral question answering (MMLU-Pro), multi-hop reasoning
(MuSiQue), and logical and analytical reasoning (AR-LSAT,
FOLIO). We describe them below:
AIME (Art of Problem Solving): The American Invita-
tional Mathematics Examination (AIME) is a challenging
high-school mathematics competition that tests advanced
mathematical skills. We use questions from AIME to eval-
uate the mathematical reasoning abilities of LLMs. In our
experiments, we use 90 problems from the 2022–2024 edi-
tions as the validation set and 30 problems from the 2025
edition as the test set.
HMMT (Harvard-MIT Mathematics Tournament): The
Harvard–MIT Mathematics Tournament (HMMT) is an-
other challenging high-school mathematics competition. For
our experiments, we use 90 problems from the February
2023, 2024, and 2025 editions as the validation set, and 30
problems from the November 2025 edition as the test set.
We use the publicly available datasets released by Math-
Arena (Balunovi´ c et al., 2026).
MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024): MMLU-Pro is a more
challenging variant of the MMLU benchmark (Hendrycks
et al., 2021), a general-domain question answering dataset.
Compared to the original benchmark, which provides four
answer choices per question, MMLU-Pro includes ten op-
tions per question. Since the original validation set contains
only 70 problems, we instead create larger validation and
test sets by partitioning the full test set into two subsets. We
then sample 100 problems from the validation subset and
500 problems from the test subset to form the validation and
test sets, respectively.
MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022): MuSiQue is a multi-hop
reasoning dataset whose questions require answering multi-
ple implicit subquestions to arrive at the correct answer. The
dataset is explicitly constructed to avoid questions that can
be solved by answering only a single subquestion, thereby
requiring genuine multi-hop reasoning. Due to the large size
of the dataset, we randomly sample 160 questions from the
training split to form the validation set and 500 questions
from the validation split to form the test set.
AR-LSAT (Zhong et al., 2021): AR-LSAT is an analytical
reasoning dataset derived from questions in the Law School
Admission Test (LSAT). We use a random subset of 100
questions from the validation split as the validation set and
include all 230 questions from the test split as the test set.
FOLIO (Han et al., 2024): FOLIO is a dataset designed
to test complex logical reasoning abilities. Each instance
5
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Table 3. Results (mean accuracy with confidence intervals across all runs) obtained using basic chain-of-thought and three automatic
prompt optimization methods, with DeepSeek-V3.1 used as the backbone model and GPT-4.1 used as the optimizer. ETGPO (our method)
outperforms prior methods on average and on three of six benchmarks. Note: Bold = best; underline = second-best.
Method Math Reasoning General Multi-hop Logical Reasoning Avg.
AIME HMMT MMLU-Pro Musique AR-LSAT FOLIO
Chain of Thought 65.52 ± 1.25 53.65 ± 1.28 82.74 ± 0.53 76.92 ± 0.39 90.65 ± 0.61 75.58 ± 0.88 74.18
MIPROv2 68.23 ± 1.25 60.68 ± 1.51 83.73 ± 0.54 76.80 ± 0.61 91.66 ± 0.68 82.33 ± 0.57 77.24
GEPA 64.48 ± 1.33 57.55 ± 1.30 83.76 ± 0.66 76.38 ± 0.55 90.92 ± 0.57 82.45 ± 0.40 75.92
ETGPO (Ours) 69.74 ± 1.33 58.65 ± 1.62 83.65 ± 0.52 79.03 ± 0.72 91.44 ± 0.52 82.45 ± 0.93 77.49
Table 4. Optimization-phase token usage (total input plus output tokens, truncated to thousands) for three automatic prompt optimization
methods, with DeepSeek-V3.1 used as the backbone model and GPT-4.1 used as the optimizer. The ∆ column denotes the ratio of each
method’s average token usage to that of ETGPO. ETGPO (our method) consistently uses the fewest tokens across all benchmarks.
Note: Bold = lowest; underline = second-lowest.
Method AIME HMMT MMLU-Pro Musique AR-LSAT FOLIO Avg. ∆
MIPROv2 17,400 17,027 4,785 26,096 10,735 3,276 13,220 6.5×
GEPA 9,899 9,923 3,300 6,449 5,523 2,550 6,274 3.1×
ETGPO (Ours) 3,098 3,295 778 3,063 1,378 507 2,020—
consists of premises and a conclusion, and the task is to
determine whether the conclusion logically follows from
the premises. For our experiments, we use a random subset
of 100 questions from the training split as the validation set
and all 203 questions from the validation split as the test set.
4.2. Baselines
We include Chain of Thought (Wei et al., 2023) as our pri-
mary baseline, since the other APO baselines in this paper
improve upon its prompt. We also include two state-of-the-
art APO methods for comparison: GEPA (Agrawal et al.,
2025) and MIPRO (Opsahl-Ong et al., 2024). We use the
DSPy (Khattab et al., 2023) implementations of GEPA and
MIPRO; in DSPy, MIPRO is implemented as MIPROv2.
For both GEPA and MIPRO, we use the heavy optimiza-
tion mode, which uses the largest number of evaluations to
search for the best prompt. Our goal is to compare against
the strongest versions of these methods available.
4.3. Experimental Results
Accuracy results We evaluate our method and the base-
lines on the test sets of the listed datasets. A subset of
the results is shown in Table 1 (backbone LLM: GPT-
4.1-mini (OpenAI, 2025b)) and Table 3 (backbone LLM:
DeepSeek-V3.1 (DeepSeek, 2025)). All reported numbers
correspond to the accuracy achieved by the final prompts
produced by each method when evaluated on the correspond-
ing test sets.
For all APO methods reported in these tables, we use GPT-
4.1 (OpenAI, 2025a) as the optimizer LLM. To reduce com-
putational cost, we run each APO method only once per
dataset, but evaluate the resulting prompt multiple times.
For the smaller mathematics datasets, we perform 64 runs
per problem. For the larger datasets, we use fewer runs
per problem, specifically 8 runs for MuSiQue and MMLU-
Pro, and 16 runs for AR-LSAT and FOLIO. We use a high
number of runs per prompt to obtain tighter confidence in-
tervals and stronger statistical reliability. Following recent
work (Ho et al., 2025), we use LLM-based answer equiva-
lence checking: a prediction is correct if it exactly matches
the ground truth or, when exact match fails, is judged equiv-
alent by a strong LLM (GPT-5 (Singh et al., 2025)).
For our method, we use the same hyperparameter values
across all datasets, chosen based on a hyperparameter search
conducted on the AIME validation set. To reduce compu-
tational cost, we do not perform a separate hyperparameter
search for each dataset. Specifically, we set K, the number
of error collection runs, to 5; G, the number of selected er-
ror categories, to 10; and use detailed guidance texts rather
than the short variant. We do not perform a search over the
batch size parameter B and instead use the default value
of 6. Tuning these hyperparameters on a per-dataset basis
could further improve performance.
We now discuss the results shown in Table 1 and Table 3.
Our method achieves the best average performance across
both tables, consistently matching or outperforming other
APO methods. On individual datasets, it performs best on
5 out of 6 with GPT-4.1-mini as the backbone LLM, and 3
out of 6 with DeepSeek-V3.1.
In terms of absolute improvements on individual datasets,
6
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Number of Failed Traces
250
200
150
100
50
0
-4.5%
Baseline
Taxonomy-Guided
-7.0%
-2.2%
-13.0%
-2.6%
-15.3%
Number of Failed Traces
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
-32.2%
Baseline
Taxonomy-Guided
-33.3%
-10.0%
+8.9% -3.3% -32.8%
C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6
Error Category
C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6
Error Category
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Count of failed traces before and after optimization with ETGPO for the top 6 error categories from the error taxonomy on
the validation sets of (a) AIME and (b) FOLIO. All but one category shows fewer failed traces, supporting our hypothesis that targeted
guidance reduces error prevalence.
Table 5. Effect of varying K, the number of error collection runs,
on final prompt accuracy for the AIME and FOLIO validation sets.
Accuracy saturates at different values of K, suggesting the optimal
number of runs is dataset-dependent.
K AIME FOLIO
Baseline 52.35 ± 0.91 72.50 ± 0.08
1 52.61 ± 0.59 79.70 ± 0.37
5 53.72 ± 0.28 79.53 ± 0.53
10 53.43 ± 1.06 78.32 ± 0.38
the largest gains are observed on FOLIO for both backbone
models, with improvements of approximately 6–7 percent-
age points in accuracy. AIME, HMMT, and MuSiQue also
show strong gains, ranging from roughly 2 to 5 percentage
points across the two backbone models consistently. In con-
trast, gains on MMLU-Pro are modest, which we attribute
to the fact that these questions often require more specific
domain knowledge that is less likely to be improved through
general guidance alone; retrieval-based approaches may be
more suitable in this setting. AR-LSAT shows a strong im-
provement of approximately 2.5 percentage points when
using GPT-4.1-mini as the backbone LLM. However, perfor-
mance on AR-LSAT appears to be saturated for DeepSeek-
V3.1, with accuracies approaching 90%, leaving limited
room for further improvement. In this regime, the execution
logs provide little additional signal from which to extract
useful guidance, resulting in marginal gains.
Token usage results In Table 2 and Table 4, we report the
total number of input and output tokens consumed during
the optimization phase of each APO method evaluated, in-
cluding our method, with all values reported in thousands
and truncated for clarity. In all cases, the reported token
counts correspond to the sum of tokens consumed by the
backbone model and, when applicable, the optimizer LLM.
Across both backbone LLMs and all datasets, our method
consistently uses the fewest tokens during the optimization
phase. In particular, the total token usage of our method is
approximately one third of that of the next most expensive
method, GEPA. These results demonstrate that our method
achieves performance that is on par with or better than state-
of-the-art APO methods, while being substantially more
token-efficient during optimization.
4.4. Detailed Analysis
We next present a set of analysis experiments designed to
study the impact of various hyperparameters. All experi-
ments are conducted on the validation sets of AIME and
FOLIO, using GPT-4.1-mini as the backbone model and
GPT-4.1 as the optimizer model. For each configuration, we
run each compared method three times, with 20 evaluation
runs per generated prompt. Unless otherwise specified, all
other hyperparameters are fixed to their default values. We
also include the base Chain of Thought prompt as a baseline
in these analyses. Note that an experiment with G, which
determines the number of top error categories selected for
guidance generation, can be found in Section A.
Number of error collection runs In the first experiment,
shown in Table 5, we study the effect of the parameter K,
which controls the number of error collection runs, on the
accuracy of the final prompt. The effect of K varies across
datasets. For AIME, accuracy improves as K increases
from 1 to 5, but saturates at K = 10. For FOLIO, the best
performance is achieved already at K = 1, with accuracy
saturating for larger values. This suggests that additional
execution traces provide diminishing returns for FOLIO,
likely because multiple runs of the same problem do not
yield substantially different error patterns.
7
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Table 6. Ablation study on the components of ETGPO. The first ablation replaces taxonomy construction with raw failure sampling. The
second ablation replaces LLM-generated guidance with direct insertion of error category descriptions. The third ablation compares short
guidance with detailed guidance containing fuller explanations and examples. Overall, each ablation results in a reduction in average
performance, indicating that all components contribute to the effectiveness of ETGPO.
Method AIME FOLIO Avg. ∆
ETGPO 53.72 ± 0.28 79.53 ± 0.53 66.63 –
Ablation 1: Raw Sampling 53.39 ± 0.84 77.13 ± 0.45 65.26 -1.37
Ablation 2: Direct Categories 52.52 ± 1.27 78.33 ± 0.96 65.43 -1.20
Ablation 3: Short Guidance 52.20 ± 0.96 76.62 ± 0.90 64.41 -2.22
Error reduction In the second experiment, shown in Fig-
ure 3, we examine whether the generated guidance effec-
tively reduces the types of errors captured by the different
error categories. Using the optimizer LLM for categoriza-
tion, we compare the number of failed traces assigned to
the top six error categories before optimization (baseline)
and after optimization, evaluated on the validation sets of
AIME and FOLIO, respectively. As shown in the bar charts,
the number of failed traces decreases consistently across
all error categories after optimization, demonstrating the
effectiveness of the prompts generated by our method in
mitigating these errors.
4.5. Ablation Experiments
We also conduct a set of ablation experiments to assess
the contribution of different components of our method.
The results are reported in Table 6. Similar to the analysis
experiments, all ablations are conducted on the validation
sets of AIME and FOLIO, using GPT-4.1-mini as the back-
bone model and GPT-4.1 as the optimizer model. For each
ablation setting, we run the method three times, with 20
evaluation runs per generated prompt.
Error taxonomy creation The first ablation studies the
importance of the error taxonomy creation step. Specif-
ically, it examines whether explicitly categorizing errors
across failed traces provides additional value over directly
using raw failed traces. In this ablation, we skip taxonomy
creation and instead pass a sample of 10 failed traces (one
per problem) directly to the guidance generation step. The
results indicate that error taxonomy creation is beneficial on
average, with performance on FOLIO dropping by approx-
imately 2 percentage points when this step is removed. In
contrast, the drop isn’t as significant on AIME, suggesting
that a small sample of failed traces might be sufficient to
cover the most salient error patterns for this dataset.
Guidance generation The second ablation evaluates the
role of the guidance generation step itself. Rather than
generating guidance text, this ablation directly constructs
the final prompt by inserting the selected error category de-
scriptions as bullet points, preceded by a generic preamble
encouraging the model to watch for common error patterns.
The results show a clear performance degradation across
both datasets, indicating that explicit guidance generation
adds value beyond error category descriptions alone. In
particular, the guidance generation step contributes action-
able advice and concrete correct and incorrect examples that
help the model better understand when and how each error
category applies.
Detailed vs short guidance The third ablation examines
the effect of guidance granularity. We test a variant of the
final prompt in which each error category is summarized
using only one to two lines, rather than a more detailed
description. As shown in the results, this ablation yields the
largest performance drop across both datasets, with an aver-
age decrease of approximately two percentage points. This
finding highlights the importance of providing descriptive
guidance for each error category in the final prompt.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we proposed Error Taxonomy-Guided
Prompt Optimization (ETGPO), a feedback-driven APO
method that builds an error taxonomy to provide an in-
terpretable view of the dataset-level error landscape and
generates guidance only for the most prevalent error cate-
gories. By focusing on highly prevalent errors, we ensured
that prompt edits generalize beyond the validation set. This
allowed us to bypass expensive iterative validation, making
our method substantially more efficient, as demonstrated in
Section 4. Despite this efficiency, ETGPO remained highly
competitive with state-of-the-art methods, outperforming on
multiple datasets across mathematical reasoning, question
answering, and logical reasoning.
References
Agarwal, E., Magazine, R., Singh, J., Dani, V., Ganu, T.,
and Nambi, A. PromptWizard: Optimizing prompts
via task-aware, feedback-driven self-evolution. In Che,
W., Nabende, J., Shutova, E., and Pilehvar, M. T. (eds.),
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
8
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
tics: ACL 2025, pp. 19974–20003, Vienna, Austria, July
2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN
979-8-89176-256-5. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.
1025. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.
findings-acl.1025/.
Agrawal, L. A., Tan, S., Soylu, D., Ziems, N., Khare, R.,
Opsahl-Ong, K., Singhvi, A., Shandilya, H., Ryan, M. J.,
Jiang, M., Potts, C., Sen, K., Dimakis, A. G., Stoica, I.,
Klein, D., Zaharia, M., and Khattab, O. Gepa: Reflective
prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learn-
ing, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.
19457.
Art of Problem Solving. Aime problems and solutions. URL
https://artofproblemsolving.com/wiki/
index.php/AIME_Problems_and_Solutions.
Accessed: 2025-01-27.
Balunovi´ c, M., Dekoninck, J., Petrov, I., Jovanovi´ c, N.,
and Vechev, M. Matharena: Evaluating llms on un-
contaminated math competitions, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2505.23281.
DeepSeek. Deepseek-v3.1 release, 2025. URL https://
api-docs.deepseek.com/news/news250821.
Accessed: 2025-01-27.
Fernando, C., Banarse, D. S., Michalewski, H., Osin-
dero, S., and Rockt¨ aschel, T. Promptbreeder: Self-
referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. In
Salakhutdinov, R., Kolter, Z., Heller, K., Weller, A.,
Oliver, N., Scarlett, J., and Berkenkamp, F. (eds.), Pro-
ceedings of the 41st International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pp. 13481–13544. PMLR, 21–27 Jul
2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v235/fernando24a.html.
Guo, Q., Wang, R., Guo, J., Li, B., Song, K., Tan, X., Liu,
G., Bian, J., and Yang, Y. Connecting large language
models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
prompt optimizers. In The Twelfth International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=ZG3RaNIsO8.
Han, S., Schoelkopf, H., Zhao, Y., Qi, Z., Riddell, M., Zhou,
W., Coady, J., Peng, D., Qiao, Y., Benson, L., Sun, L.,
Wardle-Solano, A., Szabo, H., Zubova, E., Burtell, M.,
Fan, J., Liu, Y., Wong, B., Sailor, M., Ni, A., Nan, L.,
Kasai, J., Yu, T., Zhang, R., Fabbri, A. R., Kryscinski, W.,
Yavuz, S., Liu, Y., Lin, X. V., Joty, S., Zhou, Y., Xiong,
C., Ying, R., Cohan, A., and Radev, D. Folio: Natural
language reasoning with first-order logic, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00840.
Harvard-MIT Mathematics Tournament. Hmmt archive
of problems and results. URL https://www.hmmt.
org/www/archive/problems. Accessed: 2025-
01-27.
Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika,
M., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring massive
multitask language understanding, 2021. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300.
Ho, X., Huang, J., Boudin, F., and Aizawa, A. Llm-as-a-
judge: Reassessing the performance of llms in extractive
qa, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
11972.
Khattab, O., Singhvi, A., Maheshwari, P., Zhang, Z., San-
thanam, K., Vardhamanan, S., Haq, S., Sharma, A.,
Joshi, T. T., Moazam, H., Miller, H., Zaharia, M., and
Potts, C. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model
calls into self-improving pipelines, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.03714.
OpenAI. Introducing gpt-4.1 in the api, 2025a. URL
https://openai.com/index/gpt-4-1/. Ac-
cessed: 2025-01-27.
OpenAI. Gpt-4.1 mini model — openai api, 2025b.
URL https://platform.openai.com/docs/
models/gpt-4.1-mini. Accessed: 2025-01-27.
Opsahl-Ong, K., Ryan, M. J., Purtell, J., Broman, D., Potts,
C., Zaharia, M., and Khattab, O. Optimizing instructions
and demonstrations for multi-stage language model pro-
grams. In Al-Onaizan, Y., Bansal, M., and Chen, Y.-N.
(eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 9340–
9366, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
emnlp-main.525. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2024.emnlp-main.525/.
Pryzant, R., Iter, D., Li, J., Lee, Y., Zhu, C., and Zeng,
M. Automatic prompt optimization with “gradient de-
scent” and beam search. In Bouamor, H., Pino, J., and
Bali, K. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pp. 7957–7968, Singapore, December 2023. Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.
emnlp-main.494. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2023.emnlp-main.494/.
Singh, A., Fry, A., Perelman, A., Tart, A., Ganesh, A.,
El-Kishky, A., McLaughlin, A., Low, A., Ostrow, A.,
Ananthram, A., et al. Openai gpt-5 system card, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03267.
9
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Trivedi, H., Balasubramanian, N., Khot, T., and Sabharwal,
A. Musique: Multihop questions via single-hop ques-
tion composition, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2108.00573.
Wang, Y., Ma, X., Zhang, G., Ni, Y., Chandra, A., Guo,
S., Ren, W., Arulraj, A., He, X., Jiang, Z., Li, T., Ku,
M., Wang, K., Zhuang, A., Fan, R., Yue, X., and Chen,
W. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-
task language understanding benchmark, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01574.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter,
B., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q., and Zhou, D. Chain-of-
thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2201.11903.
Yang, C., Wang, X., Lu, Y., Liu, H., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., and
Chen, X. Large language models as optimizers. In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=Bb4VGOWELI.
Yuksekgonul, M., Bianchi, F., Boen, J., Liu, S., Huang, Z.,
Guestrin, C., and Zou, J. Textgrad: Automatic ”differen-
tiation” via text, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2406.07496.
Zhong, W., Wang, S., Tang, D., Xu, Z., Guo, D., Wang,
J., Yin, J., Zhou, M., and Duan, N. Ar-lsat: Investigat-
ing analytical reasoning of text, 2021. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2104.06598.
Zhou, Y., Muresanu, A. I., Han, Z., Paster, K., Pitis,
S., Chan, H., and Ba, J. Large language models are
human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=92gvk82DE-.
10
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Table 7. Effect of varying G, the number of top error categories selected for guidance generation, on final prompt accuracy for the AIME
and FOLIO validation sets. Each dataset’s accuracy saturates at a different G, suggesting the optimal number of error categories varies by
task.
G AIME FOLIO
Baseline 52.35 ± 0.91 72.50 ± 0.08
3 52.15 ± 0.50 78.35 ± 0.60
5 52.83 ± 0.12 79.72 ± 0.21
10 53.72 ± 0.28 79.53 ± 0.53
A. Experiment on number of top error categories
In this experiment, shown in Table 7, we analyze the effect of the parameter G, which determines the number of top error
categories selected for guidance generation. For AIME, accuracy improves steadily as G increases, reflecting the presence
of more than ten informative error categories. In contrast, performance on FOLIO saturates after G = 5. This behavior is
likely due to the fact that FOLIO typically yields around ten error categories, and categories beyond the top five contribute
limited additional signal for learning effectiveness.
B. Error Taxonomy Creation Prompts
Error taxonomy creation uses two prompts to categorize errors found in failed traces. The first prompt, shown in Figure 4
and Figure 5, categorizes the first batch of traces. The second prompt, shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7, also contains the
error categories discovered so far and prompts the LLM to categorize into existing categories, only creating new categories
if substantially different errors are encountered. Note that both prompts are split across figures due to their length.
C. Guidance Generation Prompt
Figure 8 and Figure 9 contain the prompt used for guidance generation. Again, note that the prompt is split across figures
due to its length.
D. ETGPO-Optimized Prompts
We present prompts optimized by ETGPO for the datasets HMMT, MMLU-Pro, Musique, AR-LSAT, and FOLIO in
Figure 10, Figure 11, Figure 12, Figure 13, and Figure 14 respectively.
11
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
You are an expert at analyzing why language models fail on {domain_description}.
## Failure 1
## Failure (Problem {problem_idx}, Run {run_id})
### Problem
{problem}
### Correct Answer
{correct_answer}
### Model’s Reasoning
{reasoning}
### Model’s Answer
{predicted_answer}
---
## Failure 2
## Failure (Problem {problem_idx}, Run {run_id})
...
## Your Task
Analyze each failure and identify the root cause of each error. Be as descriptive as
possible.
For each failure, find:
1. The EARLIEST point in the reasoning where something went wrong
2. What specifically went wrong (calculation error, wrong approach, misunderstanding,
etc.)
3. Why this error led to the wrong final answer
Create issue categories that capture each type of error. Categories should be general
enough to potentially apply to other traces, but specific enough to be meaningful.
IMPORTANT: Each category must be SELF-CONTAINED and understandable by someone who has
NOT seen the original problems.
## Output Format
Return a JSON object with:
‘‘‘json
{
"categories": [
{
"category_name": "Short descriptive name for this type of error",
"summary": "One sentence describing the core error pattern.",
"description": "Detailed description of what goes wrong in this category.
Be very specific.",
"example": "A concrete, self-contained example. Format: ’Problem: [simple
problem]. Error: [what the model does wrong]. Correct: [what should happen].’",
"error_type": "Type of error (e.g., Calculation Error, Wrong Approach,
Conceptual Misunderstanding, Missing Step, Logical Fallacy, Factual Error,
Incomplete Reasoning, Misreading the Problem)",
"why_leads_to_wrong_answer": "Explanation of how this error causes wrong
answers"
}
],
Figure 4. Error taxonomy creation prompt for first batch (Part 1 of 2)
12
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
"failure_assignments": [
{
"failure_id": 1,
"problem_idx": <problem_idx>,
"run_id": <run_id>,
"category_name": "Name of the category this failure belongs to",
"trace_details": {
"trace_specific_location": "Where in the reasoning the error occurred",
"trace_specific_details": "Specific details about what went wrong"
}
}
]
}
‘‘‘
Figure 5. Error taxonomy creation prompt for first batch (Part 2 of 2)
You are an expert at analyzing why language models fail on {domain_description}.
## Existing Issue Categories
### Category: {category_name}
- Summary: {summary}
- Description: {description}
- Example: {example}
- Error Type: {error_type}
- Why it leads to wrong answer: {why_leads_to_wrong_answer}
- Traces with this issue so far: {trace_count}
### Category: {category_name}
...
## Failure 1
## Failure (Problem {problem_idx}, Run {run_id})
### Problem
{problem}
### Correct Answer
{correct_answer}
### Model’s Reasoning
{reasoning}
### Model’s Answer
{predicted_answer}
---
## Failure 2
## Failure (Problem {problem_idx}, Run {run_id})
...
## Your Task
For each failure:
1. Determine if the error fits one of the EXISTING categories
2. OR create a NEW category if the error is fundamentally different
Figure 6. Error taxonomy creation prompt for subsequent batches (Part 1 of 2)
13
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
## Output Format
Return a JSON object with:
‘‘‘json
{
"new_categories": [
{
"category_name": "Short descriptive name for NEW error type",
"summary": "One sentence describing the core error pattern.",
"description": "Detailed description of what goes wrong.",
"example": "A concrete example.",
"error_type": "Type of error (e.g., Calculation Error, Wrong Approach,
Conceptual Misunderstanding, Missing Step, Logical Fallacy, Factual Error,
Incomplete Reasoning, Misreading the Problem)",
"why_leads_to_wrong_answer": "Explanation of how this error causes wrong
answers"
}
],
"failure_assignments": [
{
"failure_id": 1,
"problem_idx": <problem_idx>,
"run_id": <run_id>,
"is_new_category": false,
"category_name": "Name of existing or new category",
"trace_details": {
"trace_specific_location": "Where in the reasoning the error occurred",
"trace_specific_details": "Specific details about what went wrong"
}
}
]
}
‘‘‘
Note: "new_categories" should only contain categories that don’t exist yet.
Figure 7. Error taxonomy creation prompt for subsequent batches (Part 2 of 2)
You are an expert at improving language model performance on {domain_description}.
I have identified the following error categories from model failures. Generate
guidance to help avoid these errors.
## Category 1: {category_name}
**Statistics:** {failure_count} failures ({coverage_pct}%), {problem_count} problems
**Summary:** {summary}
**Description:** {description}
**Example:** {example}
**Error Type:** {error_type}
**Why it leads to wrong answer:** {why_leads_to_wrong_answer}
---
Figure 8. Guidance generation prompt (Part 1 of 2)
14
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
## Category 2: {category_name}
...
## Your Task
Generate guidance text that:
1. Addresses each failure category with specific, actionable advice
2. Is written as instructions TO the model
3. Uses concrete examples where helpful
4. Is prioritized by frequency
Generate DETAILED guidance with examples. Each item should include:
- Description of the error pattern
- Actionable advice on how to avoid it
- WRONG example showing the error
- CORRECT example showing proper approach
## Critical Constraints
- The goal is ACCURACY, not caution. Never generate guidance that encourages the model
to refuse, abstain, or say "not specified" when an answer can be reasonably
provided.
- CORRECT examples must always show the model providing a substantive answer. Never
show abstention/refusal as the correct behavior.
## Output Format
Return a JSON object with:
‘‘‘json
{
"guidance_items": [
{
"category_name": "Name of the category",
"guidance_text": "The full guidance text for this category"
}
],
"preamble": "1-2 sentence introduction",
"full_prompt": "Complete enhanced prompt starting with base instruction"
}
‘‘‘
The "full_prompt" should start with:
"Please think step by step and then solve the task."
Then add your preamble and guidance items.
Figure 9. Guidance generation prompt (Part 2 of 2)
15
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Please think step by step and then solve the task.
To maximize accuracy and reliability on math problems, carefully follow these detailed
instructions addressing common error patterns. Each guideline targets a specific
failure mode and provides actionable steps and examples to help you avoid mistakes.
1. Algebraic Manipulation Error in Multi-Variable Systems:
Description: Errors occur when manipulating or solving systems of equations with
multiple variables, often due to misapplied algebraic identities, incorrect
substitutions, or arithmetic mistakes. This leads to incorrect relationships and
invalid solutions.
Actionable Advice:
- Carefully expand, simplify, and manipulate equations, especially when dealing with
sums, products, or powers of variables.
- Explicitly write out algebraic identities (e.g., (x + y)ˆ2 = xˆ2 + 2xy + yˆ2) and
check each step for correctness.
- When substituting, ensure all variables and terms are correctly replaced and
simplified.
- After solving, substitute solutions back into the original equations to verify
correctness.
WRONG Example:
Given x + y = 5 and xˆ2 + yˆ2 = 13, writing (x + y)ˆ2 = xˆ2 + yˆ2 = 25, missing the
cross term.
CORRECT Example:
(x + y)ˆ2 = xˆ2 + 2xy + yˆ2 = 25, so 13 + 2xy = 25 => 2xy = 12 => xy = 6. Now solve x
and y using x + y = 5 and xy = 6.
2. Failure to Recognize Structural Constraints:
Description: This error arises when key problem constraints (such as distinctness,
divisibility, maximality/minimality) are overlooked or misapplied, leading to
invalid or incomplete solutions.
Actionable Advice:
- Carefully identify and list all explicit and implicit constraints in the problem
statement.
- For each candidate solution, verify that all constraints are satisfied before
accepting it.
- When searching for maximal/minimal values, check all possibilities up to the
specified bound.
- For problems involving properties like primality, distinctness, or divisibility,
check each property for every element in the solution.
WRONG Example:
Find the largest integer n <= 100 such that n and n+1 are both primes. Listing 97 and
98 as a pair without checking that 98 is not prime.
CORRECT Example:
Check each n <= 100, verify both n and n+1 are prime. The largest such n is 2 (since 2
and 3 are both prime).
3. Failure to Complete Enumeration or Compute Final Numeric Answer:
Description: The model sets up a correct formula or summation but fails to compute the
explicit final numeric answer, or plugs in an incorrect value.
...
Figure 10. ETGPO-optimized prompt for the HMMT dataset using GPT-4.1-mini (backbone) and GPT-4.1 (optimizer). Truncated.
16
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Please think step by step and then solve the task.
To maximize accuracy on multiple choice reasoning questions, carefully follow the
detailed guidance below for each common error pattern. These instructions will
help you avoid frequent pitfalls and select the best answer in context.
1. Misidentification of Most Plausible or Expected Answer
Description: This error occurs when you select an answer that is factually supported
by the passage or data, but fail to recognize that the question is asking for the
most plausible, expected, or typical answer in a specific context (such as
population-level, cultural, or comparative plausibility). You may default to the
most directly supported or familiar fact, rather than considering which answer
best fits the comparative or contextual framing of the question.
Actionable Advice:
- Always check if the question is asking for the ’most plausible’, ’most likely’, ’
expected’, or ’best’ answer in a specific context (e.g., population, culture, or
comparison).
- Compare all answer choices in light of the context and select the one that best fits
the comparative or expected framing, not just one that is factually supported.
- Ask yourself: "Which answer would be most typical or expected in this context, even
if others are also supported?"
WRONG Example:
Passage: Discusses health benefits of sauna use in Finland.
Question: Which outcome is most plausible in Finland?
Model selects: ’Lower rates of cardiovascular-related deaths among frequent sauna
users’ (factually supported, but not the most contextually plausible answer).
CORRECT Example:
Model selects: ’An 86-year old male mayor who is revered in the community’ (more
plausible as a population-level or cultural outcome in Finland, given the context).
2. Procedural Error in Multi-Step Quantitative Reasoning
Description: This error happens when you make a mistake in one or more steps of a
multi-step quantitative problem, such as misapplying formulas, failing to account
for constraints (like material widths or wastage), or misinterpreting which
dimensions or units to use. Errors in any step can propagate and lead to an
incorrect final answer.
Actionable Advice:
- Break down the problem into clear, sequential steps and explicitly state each
calculation.
- Carefully check the requirements and constraints (e.g., roll width, rounding up to
whole units, wastage).
- After each step, verify that your result makes sense before proceeding.
- Double-check unit conversions and ensure you are using the correct dimensions/
formulas for each step.
WRONG Example:
Problem: Calculate the cost of carpeting a room using rolls of fixed width.
Model calculates: Total area of the room and multiplies by cost per area, ignoring
roll width and necessary strips.
CORRECT Example:
Model calculates: Number of strips needed based on roll width and room dimensions,
then total area of carpet required, then multiplies by cost per area, accounting
for all constraints.
...
Figure 11. ETGPO-optimized prompt for the MMLU-Pro dataset using GPT-4.1-mini (backbone) and GPT-4.1 (optimizer). Truncated.
17
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Please think step by step and then solve the task.
To maximize accuracy on multi-hop reasoning questions, carefully follow these detailed
instructions for each common error type. Applying these strategies will help
ensure your answers are precise, fully supported, and contextually appropriate.
1. Failure to Identify the Most Specific or Relevant Answer
Description: This error occurs when you provide a general or partially correct answer
instead of the most specific or directly relevant one required by the question.
Often, you may stop at a higher-level category or a more general answer, missing a
more precise or contextually appropriate response.
Actionable Advice:
- Always check if the question asks for a specific form of the answer (e.g., symbol,
date, name, location).
- If multiple levels of specificity are possible, select the most precise one that
directly answers the question.
- Re-read the question to identify keywords like ’symbol’, ’exact’, ’full name’, or ’
specific’.
WRONG Example:
Question: ’What is the chemical symbol for the element with atomic number 8?’
Answer: ’Oxygen.’
CORRECT Example:
Answer: ’O.’
WRONG Example:
Question: ’Which district is the city of Cambridge located in?’
Answer: ’Cambridgeshire.’ (This is the county, not the district.)
CORRECT Example:
Answer: ’Cambridge district.’
2. Failure to Correctly Chain Multi-Hop Reasoning Steps
Description: This error happens when you skip a necessary reasoning step, make an
incorrect connection, or fail to maintain the correct chain of logic in multi-hop
questions. This often leads to answers that are plausible based on partial
information, but not fully supported by the required reasoning chain.
Actionable Advice:
- Break down the question into individual reasoning steps and solve each step in order.
- Explicitly identify intermediate entities or facts before proceeding to the next
step.
- Do not stop after the first plausible answer; ensure all steps are completed.
WRONG Example:
Question: ’Who was the president of the country whose capital is Paris in 2010?’
Answer: ’Emmanuel Macron.’ (Current president, not the one in 2010.)
CORRECT Example:
Step 1: The capital Paris is in France.
Step 2: Who was president of France in 2010? Nicolas Sarkozy.
Answer: ’Nicolas Sarkozy.’
...
Figure 12. ETGPO-optimized prompt for the Musique dataset using GPT-4.1-mini (backbone) and GPT-4.1 (optimizer). Truncated.
18
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Please think step by step and then solve the task.
To maximize logical reasoning accuracy, carefully follow these detailed instructions
to avoid common error patterns. Each guideline addresses a specific reasoning
pitfall and provides concrete steps and examples to ensure correct answer
selection.
1. Failure to Systematically Enumerate Possibilities:
- Always systematically list or consider every possible arrangement or scenario that
fits the given constraints before making deductions.
- Use tables, lists, or diagrams to track possibilities and eliminate options only
after thorough checking.
- WRONG: Only checking a few arrangements and missing valid ones.
- CORRECT: Listing all possible assignments and checking each against the constraints.
2. Constraint Overlook or Misapplication:
- Carefully identify and restate every constraint before beginning your reasoning.
- At each step, check that all constraints are being enforced for every configuration
you consider.
- WRONG: Allowing arrangements that violate a stated constraint.
- CORRECT: Explicitly checking each arrangement for all constraints.
3. Overgeneration of Necessary Conclusions:
- For ’must be true’ questions, only select options that are true in every possible
valid configuration, not just in some.
- Test each answer choice by considering whether it could ever be false under the
given constraints.
- WRONG: Selecting multiple ’must be true’ answers when only one is required.
- CORRECT: Only selecting the answer that is necessarily true in all cases.
4. Misapplication of ’Must Be True’ vs. ’Could Be True’:
- For ’must be true’ questions, verify that the statement holds in every possible
configuration allowed by the constraints.
- For ’could be true’ questions, check if there is at least one valid configuration
where the statement holds.
- WRONG: Claiming something ’must be true’ just because it is possible in some cases.
- CORRECT: Distinguishing between necessity and possibility by checking all scenarios.
5. Misinterpretation of ’Cannot’ or ’Except’ Questions:
- For ’cannot be true’ questions, look for the answer choice that is impossible under
the constraints.
- For ’except’ questions, identify the one option that does not fit the stated pattern.
- Restate the question in your own words to clarify what is being asked.
- WRONG: Selecting an option that is possible when asked for something impossible.
- CORRECT: Checking each answer for impossibility and selecting accordingly.
6. Failure to Recognize Mutual Exclusivity or Uniqueness:
- For assignments, ensure that each entity occupies only one position, and each
position is filled by only one entity, unless stated otherwise.
- Explicitly check for overlaps or double assignments in your reasoning.
- WRONG: Assigning two entities to the same unique position.
- CORRECT: Ensuring each assignment is unique and non-overlapping.
Figure 13. ETGPO-optimized prompt for the AR-LSAT dataset using GPT-4.1-mini (backbone) and GPT-4.1 (optimizer).
19
Error Taxonomy-Guided Prompt Optimization
Please think step by step and then solve the task.
To improve logical reasoning accuracy, carefully distinguish between what is entailed,
contradicted, or left uncertain by the premises. Use the following detailed
guidance to avoid common reasoning errors.
1. Confusing ’False’ with ’Uncertain’ in Logical Reasoning
Description: This error occurs when you treat a conclusion that is not entailed by the
premises as definitively false, rather than recognizing that it is simply
uncertain given the information provided. If the premises do not guarantee the
truth or falsity of the conclusion, the correct answer is ’Uncertain.’
Actionable Advice:
- Do NOT assume that a conclusion is false just because it cannot be proven true from
the premises.
- Only answer ’False’ if the conclusion is directly contradicted by the premises.
- If the premises are compatible with both the conclusion and its negation, answer ’
Uncertain.’
WRONG Example:
Premises: Some cats are black.
Conclusion: All cats are black.
Model’s (incorrect) answer: False (because the premises don’t prove the conclusion)
CORRECT Example:
Premises: Some cats are black.
Conclusion: All cats are black.
Proper reasoning: The premises do not guarantee or rule out the conclusion. The answer
is ’Uncertain.’
2. Mistaking Direct Contradiction for Uncertainty
Description: This error happens when you fail to recognize that a conclusion directly
contradicts a premise, and instead label it as ’Uncertain.’ If a conclusion is
explicitly ruled out by the premises, it must be marked as ’False.’
Actionable Advice:
- Always check if the conclusion is the direct negation of any premise.
- If the conclusion is incompatible with the premises, answer ’False.’
- Do NOT answer ’Uncertain’ when a contradiction exists.
WRONG Example:
Premises: All dogs bark.
Conclusion: Some dogs do not bark.
Model’s (incorrect) answer: Uncertain
CORRECT Example:
Premises: All dogs bark.
Conclusion: Some dogs do not bark.
Proper reasoning: The conclusion directly contradicts the premise. The answer is ’
False.’
3. Illicit Elimination of Logical Possibilities
Description: This error arises when you incorrectly eliminate possible cases, treating
a conclusion as false when it is merely not entailed by the premises. If the
premises do not rule out a conclusion, but also do not entail it, the answer
should be ’Uncertain.’
Actionable Advice:
- Do NOT treat the absence of evidence as evidence of falsity.
...
Figure 14. ETGPO-optimized prompt for the FOLIO dataset using GPT-4.1-mini (backbone) and GPT-4.1 (optimizer). Truncated.
20
