arXiv:2310.01260v1 [cs.CL] 2 Oct 2023
SPELL: Semantic Prompt Evolution based on a LLM
Discussion and comparison with contemporaneous works in Appendix B
Yujian Betterest Li†♢∗ Kai Wu†
†School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
♢Institute of Freedom and Happiness, Dream Place
Abstract
Prompt engineering is a new paradigm for
enhancing the performance of trained neural
network models. For optimizing text-style
prompts, existing methods usually individually
operate small portions of a text step by step,
which either breaks the fluency or could not
globally adjust a prompt. Since large language
models (LLMs) have powerful ability of gen-
erating coherent texts token by token, can we
utilize LLMs for improving prompts? Based
on this motivation, in this paper, considering
a trained LLM as a text generator, we attempt
to design a black-box evolution algorithm for
automatically optimizing texts, namely SPELL
(Semantic Prompt Evolution based on a LLM).
The proposed method is evaluated with differ-
ent LLMs and evolution parameters in differ-
ent text tasks. Experimental results show that
SPELL could rapidly improve the prompts in-
deed. We further explore the evolution process
and discuss on the limitations, potential possi-
bilities and future work.
Figure 1: Overview of SPELL (Semantic Prompt
Evolution based on a LLM).
1 Introduction
Prompts (Liu et al., 2023) are additional contents
which would be integrated with the original input
data to enhance the performance of a trained target
model. For example, in a text classification task, a
prompt, "[input text]\nDivide the above text into 2
classes: positive and negative.\nClass:[MASK]",
may strengthen the performance of a language
model because the prompt reduces the probabilities
of many unrelated tokens and hints what the model
∗ Correspondence: bebetterest@outlook.com
Figure 2: A reproduction example including M Pr and
the response from the LLM.
should focus on. Good prompt engineering meth-
ods are able to enhance the ability of a target model
with limited and efficient optimization. Besides,
prompts are flexible. They could be continuous (Li
and Liang, 2021; Qin and Eisner, 2021), possibly
work in hidden layers (Sun et al., 2022b), and have
already been applied to many modalities, such as
text (Lester et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022), vision
(Jia et al., 2022; Sohn et al., 2023), and graph (Sun
et al., 2022a; Yi et al., 2023). In this paper, we only
focus on discrete text-style prompts applied at the
input of a language model for text tasks.
There are many methods to optimize text-style
prompts. Gradient-based methods (Wallace et al.,
2019; Shin et al., 2020) are the most intuitive one.
They usually relax the discrete embeddings for
optimization and need large computation because
of the process of backward through the trained
model. Nowadays, many target models are con-
sidered as black boxes since only inference APIs
are provided for the users. Hence, many black-box
methods, based on evolution (Sun et al., 2022c;
Sun et al., 2022b), reinforcement learning (Deng
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Diao et al., 2023)
or search strategies (Prasad et al., 2023), improve
the prompts without the information of gradients
and parameters inside the target model. In particu-
lar, evolution-based methods maintain a population
consists of several prompts as individuals and op-
timize the population by biological mechanisms
such as reproduction and selection. However, these
methods individually operate small portions of text
step by step, leading to lack of global adjustment
and serious damage on the fluency. The prompts op-
timized by these methods usually consist of various
strange characters, such as "an-lione_-lo-:)eak".
In recent years, large language models (LLMs)
(Li et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2023) are the most
popular star among various new AI applications.
Optimized on language modeling, they could get
universal generalization ability. With appropriate
instructions, they could acquire amazing perfor-
mance on language understanding, reasoning and
text generation. Especially, the generated texts are
coherent enough.
Therefore, we attempt to propose SPELL
(Semantic Prompt Evolution based on a LLM),
an evolution algorithm to optimize prompts. Since
the proposed method considers a LLM as a gen-
erator, SPELL would utilize the global feature
of a prompt and the improved prompts are co-
herent. Through experiments, we evaluate that
SPELL could rapidly improve performance keep-
ing prompts fluent. Besides, we discover the evo-
lution process and the impacts of different LLMs
or evolution strategies. The limitations, challenges
and possible directions are discussed on in the end.
2 Methodology
As shown in Figure 1, SPELL maintains a popula-
tion P OPt of NP OP prompt individuals initialized
as Iini. By two biological mechanisms, reproduc-
tion and selection, the population evolves as
OF F St = reproduction(P OPt)
P OPt+1 = selection(OF F St ∪ P OPt)
where reproduction generates the offspring
OF F St from P OPt and the next population
P OPt+1 consists of individuals selected from the
union of OF F St and P OPt. As evolving for T
times, the population is gradually optimized by gen-
erating better individuals and selecting the potential
ones. In the evolution process, how to inherit out-
standing feature and make effective explorations
are the keys. In the following subsections, we intro-
duce different components of SPELL and explain
how they work in detail.
2.1 Problem Formulation
In this paper, we focus on the text tasks translated
to classification. For example, sentiment analy-
sis is to classify the emotion contained in a given
text. The text X for a target language model M is
constructed as
X= concat([input], \n, [prompt], \n, [head])
where concat stands for concatenate and [input]
for the input example. \n is considered as an inter-
val. [prompt] is the prompt to enhance M . [head]
is set as "class:" to guide M to make the predic-
tion. Next, by language modeling, M makes the
prediction as
y = arg min
li∈L
PM (li|x1, x2...xNX )
where L is the label space. To simplify the pre-
diction process, we choose one word standing for
each label, such as "positive" and "negative" in sen-
timent analysis. It is worth mentioning that we pay
attention to optimizing [prompt] keeping M fixed.
2.2 Reproduction
Reproduction is the process of generating new-
borns. To keep useful feature from the previous
generation, we select NP individuals IP,t from
P OPt as parents for each child, which is intro-
duced in Section 2.3. Besides, the newborn indi-
viduals generated by a LLM G naturally include
random variations as explorations. We construct
the core meta prompt for reproduction M Pr as
M Pr = concat([pre], \n, [exs], \n, [post])
where
          
[pre] = concat([itsk], [iprompt], [irep])
[exs] = concat([pro1], \n, [pro2]...[proNP ])
[post] = concat([if inal], [iadditional])
[proi] = concat([IP,t,i], [f iti]), i ∈ [1, NP ]
[pre] describes the information on the task ([itsk]),
defines what a prompt is for ([iprompt]) and leads to
reproduction ([irep]). [exs] shows selected parents
for reference ([pro]). [post] emphasizes generation
requests ([if inal]) and points out other additional
instructions ([iadditional]). Besides, [f iti] is the fit-
ness/score for the corresponding individual [IP,t,i].
By default, [iprompt] is set as "A prompt is to guide
a language model to better solve the task. Each
prompt is attached with a score. The better the
prompt is, the higher the score is."; [irep] is "I want
you to generate only one new and better prompt for
this task. For example, you can try word replace-
ments, active/positive voice conversions, adding
words or delete words."; [if inal] stands for "Now,
generate only one new and better prompt based
on all the information above, especially the given
prompts. For example, you can try word replace-
ments, active/positive voice conversions, adding
words or delete words." for detailed generation re-
quests; [iadditional] is introduced later and [itask] is
listed in Table 4. Given a meta prompt M Pr, an in-
dividual Io,t,i of the offspring OF F St is obtained
by
IN,t,i= EXT (G(M Pr))
where EXT extracts the new prompt by the rule
included in [iadditional]. Specifically, in this pa-
per, [iadditional] is set as "Let’s think step by step
briefly. In the end, output one generated prompt
inside curly brackets {}, such as {Please help me
to classify.}.", which means EXT would take out
the content inside a pair of curly brackets. In par-
ticular, the optimization is prompt-wise global and
semantic because G generates texts by language
modeling. After that, we obtain the next population
P OPt+1 by selecting individuals from P OPt and
OF F St.
2.3 Selection
Selection is to choose some individuals being par-
ents or structuring the new population. Selection
strategies usually pay attention to balance survival
of the fittest and the luckiest. In SPELL, the se-
lection is based on roulette. First, we calculate
the selection probability PS,i for an individual Ii
among a candidate set CAN as
PS,i=
ef itness(Ii)
j∈CAN (ef itness(Ij ))
where f itness is the metric function which de-
scribes how a individual performs in the target task.
Better the individual is, higher the corresponding
selection probability is, which is helpful for con-
vergence. Then, NS selected individuals IS are
sampled from CAN as
IS = sample(CAN, NS , PS )
In this way, poor individual would have a chance
to be selected, which enriches the diversity.
3 Experiments
Setups We experiment on three text tasks from
GLUE (Wang et al., 2018): SST-2 for sentiment
prediction, RTE for textual entailment recognition,
and AG’s News for news classification. Follow-
ing Sun et al., 2022d, our experiments are in the
few-shot setting. Only k samples for each class are
selected as k-shot training data Dtrain. The orig-
inal development data is the test data Dtest, and
for datasets without development data, the original
test data is used. All datasets and the trained tar-
get model are implemented by huggingface1 and
all LLM APIs are available on qianfan platform2
.
In addition, by default, the trained target model
is RoBERTa-large3 (Liu et al., 2019) while the
LLM for reproduction is Llama-2-Chat-7b (Tou-
vron et al., 2023); for each round, 5 new individuals
are generated based on 1 parent and and another
5 newborns based on 2 parents; elite preservation
is implemented for keeping the best individual;
NP OP =Ns=20, T =500, k=16, the seed is set to
42, f itness is the classification accuracy and the
maximum f itness of individuals in a population
is considered as the performance of the population.
Method SST-2(%) RTE(%) AG’s News(%)
Zero-shot 70.6 45.5 54.3
Fine-tuning 81.4 54.4 86.2
LM-BFF 92.3 66.6 87.1
DART 93.5 59.0 86.8
BBT 88.2 49.1 81.2
RLPrompt 90.5 52.2 76.2
PROMPTBOOSTING 87.6 60.0 85.2
TEMPERA 91.9 60.3 85.5
SPELL 89.2 50.9 70.0
Table 1: Performance of different methods in Dtest.
Zero-shot utilizes the initial prompt for prediction. Fine-
tuning, LM-BFF (Gao et al., 2021) and DART (Zhang
et al., 2022) are white-box methods while BBT (Sun
et al., 2022c), RLPrompt (Deng et al., 2022), PROMPT-
BOOSTING (Hou et al., 2023), TEMPERA (Zhang
et al., 2023), and SPELL (ours) are black-box methods.
Overall View We compare SPELL with state-of-
the-art methods and feasible black-box works. As
shown in Table 1, as a black-box method, SPELL
could improve the accuracy and shows the potential
of prompt optimization problems.
Optimization Process The optimization process
is described in Figure 3. Due to the few-shot setting,
1https://huggingface.co
2https://cloud.baidu.com/product/
wenxinworkshop
3https://huggingface.co/roberta-large
Influence of Different LLMs As shown in Table
2, we evaluate SPELL with different LLMs. With-
out any especial adaptation, not every LLM could
be utilized in SPELL. For example, BLOOMZ is
not available because it can not reply following
the hinted format. In addition, ERBIE-Bot per-
forms the best while the test accuracy of Llama2-
Chat-13B is higher than that of Llama2-Chat-7B.
It seems that larger and better LLMs would have
better performance. Thus, the LLM for generation
is essential for SPELL.
Configuration Train(%) Test(%)
Base 100.0 89.2
f itness=loss 71.9 69.4
NP OP =2 100.0 88.9
NP OP =50 100.0 87.0
k=32 95.3 86.2
k=64 92.2 90.7
Figure 3: Accuracy vs. round with different seeds.
Three seeds (41, 42 and 43) are considered. The top one
is evaluated in Dtrain while the bottom one in Dtest.
there exists a performance gap between Dtrain and
Dtest. SPELL optimizes with fewer rounds than
many black-box methods, such as BBT and RL-
PROMPT (more than 3k rounds for prompts of
only 5 tokens). In addition, it is worth noting that,
due to the randomness of evolution process and text
generation, SPELL is unstable with obvious fluc-
tuations. In addition, the individual generation pro-
cess is semantically causal and newborn prompts
are coherent since it is spelled by the LLM token
by token according to language modeling. For ex-
ample, in SST-2, given the initial prompt "Classify
the following sentence.", LLM would globally im-
prove it to a new fluent one "Can you determine
the sentiment of this sentence for me?" with clear
reasons "...more concise and direct...emphasizes
the task...more polite and conversational". A repro-
duction example is shown in Figure 2.
LLM Size(B) Train(%) Test(%)
Llama2-Chat 7 100.0 89.2
Llama2-Chat 13 96.9 90.0
BLOOMZ 7 n/a n/a
ERNIE-Bot n/a 100.0 90.7
Table 2: Performance on various LLMs in SST-2. Two
Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023) models with different size
are evaluated. BLOOMZ (Muennighoff et al., 2022)
fails to generate individuals following instructions. The
size of ERNIE-Bot (Baidu, 2023) is not available.
Table 3: Results of ablation studies in SST-2.
Base means the default settings (f itness=accuracy;
NP OP =20; k=16). loss refers to the cross-entropy loss.
Ablation Studies As shown in Table 3, we at-
tempt to find out the impact of some meaningful
factors. Even though previous methods usually
utilize loss for optimization, we find that SPELL
could not work well when f itness is set as loss.
It may demonstrate that a pure LLM could not ef-
fectively exploit the information contained in loss.
Instead, our method could improve the population
simply based on the accuracy. In addition, for the
balance of exploration and greediness, the size of
the population NP OP should be neither too small
or large. Besides, larger Dtrain trends to obtain
higher accuracy for better estimation.
4 Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper, we propose SPELL, a semantic
prompt evolution method considering a LLM as
a prompt generator. We demonstrate that the pro-
posed method could globally optimize prompts
quickly, the reproduction process is reasonable and
new spelled prompts are coherent. Besides, we
do some ablation studies for further investigation.
Even if our method seems unstable, it shows huge
latent capacity. Future work may focus on adjusting
a LLM to be more adaptive for semantic prompt
optimization, such as meta prompt optimization
and parameter effective parameter-efficient align-
ment, stabilizing the optimization, and expanding
semantic evolution beyond text optimization.
References
Baidu. 2023. Ernie bot: Baidu’s knowledge-enhanced
large language model built on full ai stack technol-
ogy. http://research.baidu.com/Blog/
index-view?id=183.
Mingkai Deng, Jianyu Wang, Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Yi-
han Wang, Han Guo, Tianmin Shu, Meng Song, Eric
Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2022. RLPrompt: Optimizing
discrete text prompts with reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
3369–3391, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Shizhe Diao, Zhichao Huang, Ruijia Xu, Xuechun Li,
LIN Yong, Xiao Zhou, and Tong Zhang. 2023. Black-
box prompt learning for pre-trained language models.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. 2021.
Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
learners. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 3816–3830, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao
Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian, and Yu-
jiu Yang. 2023. Connecting large language models
with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful prompt
optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08532.
Bairu Hou, Joe O’Connor, Jacob Andreas, Shiyu Chang,
and Yang Zhang. 2023. PromptBoosting: Black-
box text classification with ten forward passes. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 13309–13324.
PMLR.
Menglin Jia, Luming Tang, Bor-Chun Chen, Claire
Cardie, Serge Belongie, Bharath Hariharan, and Ser-
Nam Lim. 2022. Visual prompt tuning. In Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision, pages 709–
727. Springer.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. 2021.
The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
tuning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 3045–3059, Online and Punta Cana, Domini-
can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong
Wen. 2021. Pretrained language model for text gener-
ation: A survey. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
IJCAI-21, pages 4492–4499. International Joint Con-
ferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. Sur-
vey Track.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. 2021. Prefix-tuning:
Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 4582–
4597, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang,
Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Pre-
train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of
prompting methods in natural language processing.
ACM Computing Surveys, 55(9):1–35.
Xiao Liu, Kaixuan Ji, Yicheng Fu, Weng Tam, Zhengx-
iao Du, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. 2022. P-tuning:
Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning
across scales and tasks. In Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 61–68,
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika,
Adam Roberts, Stella Biderman, Teven Le Scao,
M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey
Schoelkopf, et al. 2022. Crosslingual generaliza-
tion through multitask finetuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.01786.
Archiki Prasad, Peter Hase, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit
Bansal. 2023. GrIPS: Gradient-free, edit-based in-
struction search for prompting large language models.
In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 3845–3864, Dubrovnik, Croatia.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Guanghui Qin and Jason Eisner. 2021. Learning how
to ask: Querying LMs with mixtures of soft prompts.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 5203–5212, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L. Logan IV, Eric
Wallace, and Sameer Singh. 2020. AutoPrompt: Elic-
iting Knowledge from Language Models with Auto-
matically Generated Prompts. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 4222–4235,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kihyuk Sohn, Huiwen Chang, José Lezama, Luisa Pola-
nia, Han Zhang, Yuan Hao, Irfan Essa, and Lu Jiang.
2023. Visual prompt tuning for generative transfer
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 19840–19851.
Mingchen Sun, Kaixiong Zhou, Xin He, Ying Wang,
and Xin Wang. 2022a. Gppt: Graph pre-training
and prompt tuning to generalize graph neural net-
works. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing, KDD ’22, page 1717–1727, New York, NY, USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Tianxiang Sun, Zhengfu He, Hong Qian, Yunhua Zhou,
Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. 2022b. BBTv2:
Towards a gradient-free future with large language
models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 3916–3930, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Hong Qian, Xuanjing
Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. 2022c. Black-box tuning for
language-model-as-a-service. In Proceedings of the
39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, pages 20841–20855. PMLR.
Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Hong Qian, Xuanjing
Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. 2022d. Black-box tuning for
language-model-as-a-service. In International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, pages 20841–20855.
PMLR.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open founda-
tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288.
Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gard-
ner, and Sameer Singh. 2019. Universal adversarial
triggers for attacking and analyzing NLP. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 2153–2162, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. 2018.
Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform
for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.07461.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu,
Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. 2023.
Large language models as optimizers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.03409.
Zixuan Yi, Iadh Ounis, and Craig Macdonald. 2023.
Contrastive graph prompt-tuning for cross-domain
recommendation. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems.
Ningyu Zhang, Luoqiu Li, Xiang Chen, Shumin Deng,
Zhen Bi, Chuanqi Tan, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen.
2022. Differentiable prompt makes pre-trained lan-
guage models better few-shot learners. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Tianjun Zhang, Xuezhi Wang, Denny Zhou, Dale Schu-
urmans, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2023. TEMPERA:
Test-time prompt editing via reinforcement learning.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang,
Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen
Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, et al. 2023. A
survey of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.18223.
A Other Settings
Task itask
SST-2 "The task is to classify the sentiment of a sen-
tence from movie reviews. Here are 2 classes
({negative}/{positive})."
RTE "The task is to classify the relationship between
sentence1 and sentence2. Here are 2 classes
({yes}/{no}). {yes} means the relationship is
entailment, the meaning of one sentence is en-
tailed (can be inferred) from the other sentence,
otherwise {no}."
Task Iini
SST-2 "Classify the following sentence."
RTE "Classify whether the relationship between the
following sentence1 and sentence2 is entail-
ment."
Table 4: A list of itask and Iini in the experiments.
B On the Contemporaneous Works
We discuss on two recent and similar contempo-
raneous works which utilize a LLM as a prompt
generator/optimizer as well. It is worth noticing
that OPRO and EVOPROMPT perform rather
well while SPELL (ours) does not. Moreover,
there’s overlap between the datasets on which
EVOPROMPT is evaluated and those of ours.
Considering the difference of the target model,
we think the reason may be that the accuracy
is originally higer when the target model is a
LLM, and that the improved prompts gener-
ated by a LLM could not be well "understood"
by a relatively small language model. In addition,
the comparisons of OPRO and EVOPROMPT with
SPELL (ours) are illustrated in detail as follows:
OPRO (Yang et al., 2023) The target model of
OPRO is a LLM while that of SPELL is a much
smaller language model. Besides, we think the key
difference is that OPRO constructs a prompt-score
trajectory of prompts to update the prompts while
SPELL (ours) introduces selection and reproduc-
tion with randomness from evolution algorithm for
prompt improvement.
EVOPROMPT (Guo et al., 2023) EVO-
PROMPT and SPELL are really similar. EVO-
PROMPT includes evolution algorithm as well and
further apply differential evolution with a LLM.
EVOPROMPT separately designs the crossover
and mutation operators while SPELL (ours) con-
sists of one general operator for reproduction. Be-
sides, the target model of EVOPROMPT is a LLM.
